docs/developer/alcotezt.rst, before:

Alcotezt: An Alcotest Compatibility Wrapper for Tezt
====================================================

Alcotezt is a compatibility wrapper for tests originally written in :ref:`Alcotest <alcotest_section>` (now deprecated), enabling running them with :doc:`Tezt <tezt>`.

Alcotezts (i.e. tests wrapped with Alcotezt) are programmed against an API that is compatible with
Alcotest. But, under the hood, they are registered with Tezt. This
means that they are executed in the same way as all Tezt tests are
(see :ref:`running-alcotezts` below for more details).

Alcotezts are typically declared through the ``tezt`` manifest
function. This will:

 - Create a *test library* that registers the tests in the modules
   given as argument to ``tezt``.
 - Create a *runner executable* ``main.exe`` in the test folder. The
   runner links with the test library and consists of a single call to
   Tezt's `Test.run
   <https://ocaml.org/p/tezt/latest/doc/Tezt/Test/index.html#val-run>`__.
 - Add a ``runtezt`` alias in the Dune file of the test target that
   executes the runner.
 - Finally, link the test library with Tezt's main entrypoint at
   ``tezt/tests/main.exe`` so that it registers all Alcotezts.

.. _running-alcotezts:

Running Alcotezts
-----------------

For a given folder ``$TEST_DIR``, the Alcotezts contained therein can be invoked in three ways:

 1. By executing the ``main.exe`` runner binary generated by
    Manifest. Through ``dune``, this is done with ``dune exec
    $TEST_DIR/main.exe``.
    This will execute the tests in ``$TEST_DIR`` (but not in its subdirectories).
 2. Through Dune, by building the ``runtezt`` alias in the test target
    folder. That is, executing ``dune build @$TEST_DIR/runtezt``.
    This will execute the tests in ``$TEST_DIR`` and its subdirectories.
 3. By executing the full Tezt test suite, via the main entrypoint at
    ``tezt/tests/main.exe``. Through Dune, this is done with ``dune
    exec tezt/tests/main.exe``.

Execution through the ``main.exe`` runner
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The advantage of passing through the Manifest-generated runner is that
it only depends on the tests themselves and the tested modules (and
their recursive dependencies), and so is faster to
compile. Furthermore, you can give arguments to Tezt to control
execution, e.g. passing ``--list`` to list the tests or ``--verbose``
to see debug output.

For example, to run the tests of :src:`src/lib_clic/test`::

   dune exec src/lib_clic/test/main.exe

This will execute the Alcotezts in :src:`src/lib_clic/test`. To pass
arguments to Tezt, append ``-- <TEZT_ARGS>`` to the above command::

   dune exec src/lib_clic/test/main.exe -- --list

Execution through the Dune ``runtezt`` alias
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The Manifest-generated ``runtezt`` alias can be used to execute all
Alcotezts in a folder and its sub-folders, recursively. For example,
to run all Alcotezts of protocol Alpha, run::

  dune build @src/proto_alpha/runtezt

On the other hand, there is no convenient way to pass arguments to the
underlying Tezt binaries with this method.

Execution through the Tezt main entrypoint
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Finally, Alcotezts can be executed through the Tezt main entrypoint
at ``tezt/tests/main.exe``. All Alcotezts are linked with this binary,
so that all system, integration and unit tests registered with either Tezt
or Alcotezt can be executed by invoking::

  dune exec tezt/tests/main.exe

This is used to run all tests in the CI in a unified
and load-balanced manner. This is less convenient for local use
though, as there is currently no way of executing the subset of
tests that corresponds to a specific package, file or folder. A
forthcoming release of Tezt will ameliorate this.

Notable Differences Between Alcotest and Alcotezt
-------------------------------------------------

Test grouping
+++++++++++++

First of all, some definitions:

 - In Alcotest, a "test suite" is a sequence of "tests" that are
   each composed of a sequence of "test cases".
 - In Tezt, there are only "tests", no "test suites".

With Alcotezt,
we group each Alcotest "test" into a Tezt "test". Consequently,
Alcotezt cannot execute in isolation what in Alcotest were individual
test cases.

Given an Alcotest consisting of a suite ``Suite A`` that contains a
test ``Test a`` that itself contains the test cases ``Test case a1``
and ``Test case a2``. It also contains a test ``Test b`` with the test
case ``Test case b1``:

.. code:: ocaml

  let () =
    Alcotest.run
      "Suite A"
      [
        ( "Test a",
          [
            ("Test case a1", `Quick, fun () -> ...);
            ("Test case a2", `Quick, fun () -> ...);
          ] );
        ( "Test b",
          [
            ("Test case b1", `Quick, fun () -> ...);
          ] );
      ]

Running it in with Alcotest produces::

  Testing `Suite A'.
  This run has ID `3F91T9S2'.
  
    [OK]          Test a          0   Test case a1.
    [OK]          Test a          1   Test case a2.
    [OK]          Test b          0   Test case b1.
  
  Full test results in `/home/tezos/_build/_tests/Suite A'.
  Test Successful in 0.000s. 2 tests run.

Alcotezt will group the test cases together into two tests titled
``Suite A: Test a`` and ``Suite A: Test b``. They both will be registered
under the Tezt file ``Suite A``. So running the entrypoint of this test
produces::

  [17:07:42.289] [SUCCESS] (1/2) Suite A: Test a
  [17:07:42.290] [SUCCESS] (2/2) Suite A: Test b

You can have Alcotezt print each test case as it executes by passing
the ``--info`` flag::

  [17:09:19.061] Starting test: Suite A: Test a
  [17:09:19.061] Test: Test case a1
  [17:09:19.061] Test: Test case a2
  [17:09:19.061] [SUCCESS] (1/2) Suite A: Test a
  [17:09:19.061] Starting test: Suite A: Test b
  [17:09:19.061] Test: Test case b1
  [17:09:19.061] [SUCCESS] (2/2) Suite A: Test b

If the Tezt test ``Suite A: Test a`` is selected when Tezt is
executed, then Tezt will run ``Test case a1`` and ``Test case a2`` in
sequence. There is currently no way of dynamically selecting just a
subset of test cases.

Test Output
+++++++++++

Alcotezt redirects ``Format``'s output to Tezt's `Log.debug
<https://ocaml.org/p/tezt/latest/doc/Tezt_core/Log/index.html#val-debug>`__.
To see the debug output of an Alcotezt, pass the ``--verbose`` flag to
Tezt. See the section :ref:`running-alcotezts` above for more
information on how to pass flags to Tezt when executing Alcotezts.

There is no way to redirect the output of ``Printf``. Consequently,
the output of Alcotezts that call this module directly cannot be
hidden.

The ``runtest``/``runtezt`` aliases
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Alcotezts *are not* registered as a dependency on the ``runtest``
alias. This is to avoid executing them when invoking other test
frameworks through the ``runtest`` alias in the CI. 
That is, ``dune runtest $TEST_DIR`` will not
execute any Alcotezt contained in ``$TEST_DIR``. 

Instead, Alcotezts registered through manifest create an alias ``runtezt``, that can be
used with ``dune build @$TEST_DIR/runtezt``, or one of the other methods described :ref:`above
<running-alcotezts>`.

Commit message:

Docs/Alcotezt: Adapt documentation to un-splitted tests
The alcotezt documentation was not updated with !8228, here we update
the section on how Alcotests are presented in with Alcotezt.

docs/developer/alcotezt.rst, after:

Alcotezt: An Alcotest Compatibility Wrapper for Tezt
====================================================

Alcotezt is a compatibility wrapper for tests originally written in :ref:`Alcotest <alcotest_section>` (now deprecated), enabling running them with :doc:`Tezt <tezt>`.

Alcotezts (i.e. tests wrapped with Alcotezt) are programmed against an API that is compatible with
Alcotest. But, under the hood, they are registered with Tezt. This
means that they are executed in the same way as all Tezt tests are
(see :ref:`running-alcotezts` below for more details).

Alcotezts are typically declared through the ``tezt`` manifest
function. This will:

 - Create a *test library* that registers the tests in the modules
   given as argument to ``tezt``.
 - Create a *runner executable* ``main.exe`` in the test folder. The
   runner links with the test library and consists of a single call to
   Tezt's `Test.run
   <https://ocaml.org/p/tezt/latest/doc/Tezt/Test/index.html#val-run>`__.
 - Add a ``runtezt`` alias in the Dune file of the test target that
   executes the runner.
 - Finally, link the test library with Tezt's main entrypoint at
   ``tezt/tests/main.exe`` so that it registers all Alcotezts.

.. _running-alcotezts:

Running Alcotezts
-----------------

For a given folder ``$TEST_DIR``, the Alcotezts contained therein can be invoked in three ways:

 1. By executing the ``main.exe`` runner binary generated by
    Manifest. Through ``dune``, this is done with ``dune exec
    $TEST_DIR/main.exe``.
    This will execute the tests in ``$TEST_DIR`` (but not in its subdirectories).
 2. Through Dune, by building the ``runtezt`` alias in the test target
    folder. That is, executing ``dune build @$TEST_DIR/runtezt``.
    This will execute the tests in ``$TEST_DIR`` and its subdirectories.
 3. By executing the full Tezt test suite, via the main entrypoint at
    ``tezt/tests/main.exe``. Through Dune, this is done with ``dune
    exec tezt/tests/main.exe``.

Execution through the ``main.exe`` runner
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The advantage of passing through the Manifest-generated runner is that
it only depends on the tests themselves and the tested modules (and
their recursive dependencies), and so is faster to
compile. Furthermore, you can give arguments to Tezt to control
execution, e.g. passing ``--list`` to list the tests or ``--verbose``
to see debug output.

For example, to run the tests of :src:`src/lib_clic/test`::

   dune exec src/lib_clic/test/main.exe

This will execute the Alcotezts in :src:`src/lib_clic/test`. To pass
arguments to Tezt, append ``-- <TEZT_ARGS>`` to the above command::

   dune exec src/lib_clic/test/main.exe -- --list

Execution through the Dune ``runtezt`` alias
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

The Manifest-generated ``runtezt`` alias can be used to execute all
Alcotezts in a folder and its sub-folders, recursively. For example,
to run all Alcotezts of protocol Alpha, run::

  dune build @src/proto_alpha/runtezt

On the other hand, there is no convenient way to pass arguments to the
underlying Tezt binaries with this method.

Execution through the Tezt main entrypoint
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Finally, Alcotezts can be executed through the Tezt main entrypoint
at ``tezt/tests/main.exe``. All Alcotezts are linked with this binary,
so that all system, integration and unit tests registered with either Tezt
or Alcotezt can be executed by invoking::

  dune exec tezt/tests/main.exe

This is used to run all tests in the CI in a unified
and load-balanced manner. This is less convenient for local use
though, as there is currently no way of executing the subset of
tests that corresponds to a specific package, file or folder. A
forthcoming release of Tezt will ameliorate this.

Notable Differences Between Alcotest and Alcotezt
-------------------------------------------------

Test naming
+++++++++++

First of all, some definitions:

 - In Alcotest, a "test suite" is a sequence of "tests" that are
   each composed of a sequence of "test cases".
 - In Tezt, there are only "tests", no "test suites".

With Alcotezt, each Alcotest "test case" becomes a Tezt "test". The
Alcotest suite, test and case name are used to form the title of
the Tezt test with following format: ``SUITE_NAME: TEST_NAME
(TEST_CASE_NAME)``.

Given an Alcotest consisting of a suite ``Suite A`` that contains a
test ``Test a`` that itself contains the test cases ``Test case a1``
and ``Test case a2``. It also contains a test ``Test b`` with the test
case ``Test case b1``:

.. code:: ocaml

  let () =
    Alcotest.run
      "Suite A"
      [
        ( "Test a",
          [
            ("Test case a1", `Quick, fun () -> ...);
            ("Test case a2", `Quick, fun () -> ...);
          ] );
        ( "Test b",
          [
            ("Test case b1", `Quick, fun () -> ...);
          ] );
      ]

Running it in with Alcotest produces::

  Testing `Suite A'.
  This run has ID `3F91T9S2'.
  
    [OK]          Test a          0   Test case a1.
    [OK]          Test a          1   Test case a2.
    [OK]          Test b          0   Test case b1.
  
  Full test results in `/home/tezos/_build/_tests/Suite A'.
  Test Successful in 0.000s. 2 tests run.

And running it with Alcotezt produces::

  [17:07:42.289] [SUCCESS] (1/2) Suite A: Test a (Test case a1)
  [17:07:42.289] [SUCCESS] (2/3) Suite A: Test a (Test case a2)
  [17:07:42.290] [SUCCESS] (3/3) Suite A: Test b (Test case b1)

Test Output
+++++++++++

Alcotezt redirects ``Format``'s output to Tezt's `Log.debug
<https://ocaml.org/p/tezt/latest/doc/Tezt_core/Log/index.html#val-debug>`__.
To see the debug output of an Alcotezt, pass the ``--verbose`` flag to
Tezt. See the section :ref:`running-alcotezts` above for more
information on how to pass flags to Tezt when executing Alcotezts.

There is no way to redirect the output of ``Printf``. Consequently,
the output of Alcotezts that call this module directly cannot be
hidden.

The ``runtest``/``runtezt`` aliases
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Alcotezts *are not* registered as a dependency on the ``runtest``
alias. This is to avoid executing them when invoking other test
frameworks through the ``runtest`` alias in the CI. 
That is, ``dune runtest $TEST_DIR`` will not
execute any Alcotezt contained in ``$TEST_DIR``. 

Instead, Alcotezts registered through manifest create an alias ``runtezt``, that can be
used with ``dune build @$TEST_DIR/runtezt``, or one of the other methods described :ref:`above
<running-alcotezts>`.
