docs/developer/openmetrics.rst, before:


Octez Metrics
=============

The Octez node is able to produce metrics information and serve them in the
`Open Metrics
<https://openmetrics.io/>`_ format, an emerging standard for exposing metrics data, especially used in cloud-based systems.

Supported Open Metrics
----------------------

The Octez node supports the following metrics, characterized by: the name of
the metric, the type of the metric as in the `open metrics specification
<https://openmetrics.io/>`__, a user friendly description on the metric and a
list of labels (that can be used to aggregate or query metrics).

For more information check the openmetrics specification: https://openmetrics.io/

.. csv-table::
   :file: metrics.csv
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20, 20, 20, 10


Usage
-----

To instruct the Octez node to produce metrics, the user needs to pass the option
``--listen-prometheus=<N>``. The port specified on the command line is the port
where the integrated open metrics server will be available.

Ex.::

  tezos-node run --listen-prometheus=9091

To query the open metrics server the user can simply query the node.

Ex.::

  curl http://<node_addr>:9091/metrics

Collecting metrics
------------------

Different third-party tools can be used to query the Octez node and collect
metrics from it. Let us illustrates this with the example of a `Prometheus
server <https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/>`_.

Update the Prometheus configuration file (typically, ``prometheus.yml``)
to add a "scrape job" - that is how Prometheus is made aware of a new data
source - using adequate values:

- job_name: Use a unique name among other scrape jobs. All metrics collected
  through this job will have automatically a ‘job’ label with this value added
  to it
- targets: The URL of Octez node.

::

  - job_name: 'tezos-metrics'
      scheme: http
      static_configs:
        - targets: ['localhost:9091']

Commit message:

node: turn listen-prometheus to config parameter prometheus-addr

docs/developer/openmetrics.rst, after:


Octez Metrics
=============

The Octez node is able to produce metrics information and serve them in the
`Open Metrics
<https://openmetrics.io/>`_ format, an emerging standard for exposing metrics data, especially used in cloud-based systems.

Supported Open Metrics
----------------------

The Octez node supports the following metrics, characterized by: the name of
the metric, the type of the metric as in the `open metrics specification
<https://openmetrics.io/>`__, a user friendly description on the metric and a
list of labels (that can be used to aggregate or query metrics).

For more information check the openmetrics specification: https://openmetrics.io/

.. csv-table::
   :file: metrics.csv
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 20, 20, 20, 10


Usage
-----

To instruct the Octez node to produce metrics, the user needs to pass the option
``--metrics-addr=<ADDR>:<PORT>``. The port specified on the command line is the port
where the integrated open metrics server will be available (9932 by default).
The address defaults to localhost. 
When the option is not supplied at all, no metrics are produced.
Ex.::

  tezos-node run --metrics-addr=:9091

To query the open metrics server the user can simply query the node.

Ex.::

  curl http://<node_addr>:9091/metrics

Collecting metrics
------------------

Different third-party tools can be used to query the Octez node and collect
metrics from it. Let us illustrates this with the example of a `Prometheus
server <https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/>`_.

Update the Prometheus configuration file (typically, ``prometheus.yml``)
to add a "scrape job" - that is how Prometheus is made aware of a new data
source - using adequate values:

- job_name: Use a unique name among other scrape jobs. All metrics collected
  through this job will have automatically a ‘job’ label with this value added
  to it
- targets: The URL of Octez node.

::

  - job_name: 'tezos-metrics'
      scheme: http
      static_configs:
        - targets: ['localhost:9091']
