docs/developer/rpc.rst, before:

JSON/RPC interface
==================

The Octez node provides a JSON/RPC interface. Note that it is an RPC
interface, and it is JSON based, but it does not follow the “JSON-RPC”
protocol. It is not active by default and it must be explicitly
activated with the ``--rpc-addr`` option. In that case, an RPC server
is started in a separate process, alongside the node, that is
responsible of dealing with the RPCs. Starting the RPC server as an
independent process avoids slowing down the node when an intensive RPC
usage is being done. It is also possible to run an RPC server locally
to the node thanks to the ``--local-rpc-addr`` command. Use
``--local-rpc-addr`` to use an in-node process RPC server only if you
understand the associated performance issues.

As an example, if you are not trying to run a public RPC node, but you
just want to explore the RPC interface on your own, you would run:

::

    ./octez-node run --rpc-addr localhost

The RPC interface is self-documented and the ``octez-client`` executable
is able to pretty-print the RPC API. For instance, to see the API
provided by the Octez Shell:

::

    ./octez-client rpc list

To get API attached to the “genesis” block, including the remote
procedures provided by the associated economic protocol version:

::

    ./octez-client rpc list /chains/main/blocks/genesis

You might also want the JSON schema describing the expected input and
output of a RPC. For instance:

::

    ./octez-client rpc schema get /chains/main/blocks/genesis/hash

Note: you can get the same information, but as a raw JSON object, with a
simple HTTP request:

::

   curl -s localhost:8732/chains/main/blocks/head~10
   wget -O - http://localhost:8732/describe?recurse=true
   wget -O - http://localhost:8732/describe/chains/main/blocks/genesis?recurse=true
   wget -O - http://localhost:8732/describe/chains/main/blocks/genesis/hash


An online :doc:`index <../active/rpc>` of RPC calls is
also available.

The general call of an RPC from the client is ``octez-admin-client rpc
(get|post) <url>``.
For instance, if you wish to request the current balance of a given
block and contract, you can call the associated RPC via the command :
``$ octez-admin-client rpc get
/blocks/<block_id>/proto/context/contracts/<contract_id>/balance``.

An RPC may take an *input* and generate an *output* both in JSON
format. For example, the previous RPC call, that does not require an
input, would display on the standard output : ``{ "balance":
"4000000000000" }``. When calling a RPC that requires an input
through command-line, you will be prompted to provide the JSON input
in your default configured text editor. Alternatively, you can provide
the JSON input using command
``$ octez-admin-client rpc post <url> with <JSON>``. Don't forget to quote
the JSON according to your shell rules.

If you want to learn more about the exchange of RPCs between node and
client you can pass the option ``-l`` and the client will print all the
calls with their input/output.

A useful tool to manipulate JSON is `jq <https://stedolan.github.io/jq/>`_.

RPC versions
------------

See :doc:`../introduction/versioning` and :ref:`RPC-versioning-dev`.

Commit message:

Doc: set local RPC server as default

docs/developer/rpc.rst, after:

JSON/RPC interface
==================

The Octez node provides a JSON/RPC interface. Note that it is an RPC
interface, and it is JSON based, but it does not follow the “JSON-RPC”
protocol. It is not active by default and it must be explicitly
activated with the ``--rpc-addr`` option. In that case, an RPC server
is started by the node. It is also possible to run an RPC server that
is external to the node, as a separate process, thanks to the
``--external-rpc-addr`` command. However, it is not recommended to use
``--external-rpc-addr`` as the external RPC server is not yet stable.

As an example, if you are not trying to run a public RPC node, but you
just want to explore the RPC interface on your own, you would run:

::

    ./octez-node run --rpc-addr localhost

The RPC interface is self-documented and the ``octez-client`` executable
is able to pretty-print the RPC API. For instance, to see the API
provided by the Octez Shell:

::

    ./octez-client rpc list

To get API attached to the “genesis” block, including the remote
procedures provided by the associated economic protocol version:

::

    ./octez-client rpc list /chains/main/blocks/genesis

You might also want the JSON schema describing the expected input and
output of a RPC. For instance:

::

    ./octez-client rpc schema get /chains/main/blocks/genesis/hash

Note: you can get the same information, but as a raw JSON object, with a
simple HTTP request:

::

   curl -s localhost:8732/chains/main/blocks/head~10
   wget -O - http://localhost:8732/describe?recurse=true
   wget -O - http://localhost:8732/describe/chains/main/blocks/genesis?recurse=true
   wget -O - http://localhost:8732/describe/chains/main/blocks/genesis/hash


An online :doc:`index <../active/rpc>` of RPC calls is
also available.

The general call of an RPC from the client is ``octez-admin-client rpc
(get|post) <url>``.
For instance, if you wish to request the current balance of a given
block and contract, you can call the associated RPC via the command :
``$ octez-admin-client rpc get
/blocks/<block_id>/proto/context/contracts/<contract_id>/balance``.

An RPC may take an *input* and generate an *output* both in JSON
format. For example, the previous RPC call, that does not require an
input, would display on the standard output : ``{ "balance":
"4000000000000" }``. When calling a RPC that requires an input
through command-line, you will be prompted to provide the JSON input
in your default configured text editor. Alternatively, you can provide
the JSON input using command
``$ octez-admin-client rpc post <url> with <JSON>``. Don't forget to quote
the JSON according to your shell rules.

If you want to learn more about the exchange of RPCs between node and
client you can pass the option ``-l`` and the client will print all the
calls with their input/output.

A useful tool to manipulate JSON is `jq <https://stedolan.github.io/jq/>`_.

RPC versions
------------

See :doc:`../introduction/versioning` and :ref:`RPC-versioning-dev`.
