docs/user/light.rst, before:

.. _light-mode: are done locally by the light client,

Light mode
----------

The ``tezos-client`` described
:ref:`here <howtouse_tezos_client>` forwards all RPCs to a node.
This page describes the *light* mode, a mode where the client
performs protocol RPCs locally; like the :ref:`proxy mode<proxy-mode>`.
However, contrary to the proxy mode, the light mode provides
a high-level of security. For that it obtains data from multiple
(hopefully unrelated) endpoints and make sure all endpoints send
the same data, by using *Merkle proofs*. Such proofs make very hard
for unrelated endpoints to craft fake data.

This mode is akin to a light client or *thin client* in Bitcoin terms.

While the existing implementation of the light mode is entirely functional,
it still has room for improvement, in particular communications over
the network can be reduced. Users are encouraged to manifest themselves,
so that enhancements to the light mode are made high priority: please
submit issues `here on GitLab <https://gitlab.com/tezos/tezos/-/issues>`_.

Executing commands in light mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The CLI interface of the client in light mode (the *light client* in short)
is the same as the default client. To turn light mode ON, you must
pass two arguments to ``tezos-client``:

* ``--mode light``, and
* ``--sources sources.json``.

The ``sources.json`` file contains:

* The list of endpoints to contact for retrieving data, as a list of URIs in the ``uris`` field.
  Because ``--sources`` must be the sole source of truth for incoming data, it
  supersedes ``--endpoint``. This is enforced by checking that the URI
  passed to ``--endpoint`` also appears in the ``uris`` field of the file
  passed to ``--sources``. Therefore, it is recommended to use the first
  member of the ``uris`` field as the value of ``--endpoint``.
* An optional ``min_agreement`` field, which must be a float from ``0.0`` (excluded) to ``1.0`` (included).
  This field specifies the ratio of endpoints that must agree for data
  to be accepted. The default value is ``1.0``, which means that
  all endpoints must agree for data to be considered valid (no rogue
  endpoint is tolerated).


Here is an example valid ``--sources`` file:

::

    { "min_agreement": 1.0,
      "uris": [
        "http://localhost:19733",
        "http://localhost:19735"
      ]
    }

Because computations done locally are protocol dependent, the light mode
does not support all protocols. However, at any given time, it should
support the protocol being developed (``alpha``) and the three most
recent protocols.

If ``--protocol`` is omitted when calling the light client, it
tries to match the node's protocol. On the one hand, this is handy when
testing. On the other hand, in a production environment, it is recommended
to specify ``--protocol`` if the protocol is known, to avoid an extra
RPC at **every** call ``tezos-client --mode light ...``.

Examples with the sandbox
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this section, we show examples of usage of the light mode when using
the :ref:`sandboxed node<sandboxed-mode>`. For convenience we repeat
instructions for the sandboxed mode here, but refer the reader to the
sandboxed mode page for further details. In a terminal,
start a sandboxed node:

::

    $ ./src/bin_node/tezos-sandboxed-node.sh 1 --connections 1
      # This node listens to p2p events on localhost:19731


Leave that terminal running. In a second terminal, start another node:

::

    $ ./src/bin_node/tezos-sandboxed-node.sh 2 --connections 1
      # This node listens to p2p events on localhost:19732

Leave that terminal running. In a third terminal, prepare the appropriate
environment for using the light client (from now on, all commands happen
in this terminal):

::

    $ eval `./src/bin_client/tezos-init-sandboxed-client.sh 1`

Then upgrade the node to protocol alpha:

::

    $ tezos-activate-alpha  # Triggers output in terminal of first node
    $ tezos-client bake for bootstrap1  # Triggers output in terminal of first node

Now, connect the two nodes together:

::

    $ tezos-admin-client --endpoint localhost:19731 connect address 127.0.0.1:19732
      # This triggers many lines of output in the second node's terminal,
      # as it catches up with the first node

To avoid warnings being printed in upcoming commands (optional):

::

    $ export TEZOS_CLIENT_UNSAFE_DISABLE_DISCLAIMER=y

The last step before being able to use the light client is to prepare
the JSON file to pass to ``--sources``. In our scenario, this file
specifies the two endpoints to use:

::

    $ echo '{ "uris": [ "http://localhost:18731", "http://localhost:18732" ] }' > sources.json

You're now ready to use the light client. For example, bake a block:

::

    $ tezos-client --mode light --sources sources.json bake for bootstrap1
    protocol of light mode unspecified, using the node's protocol: ProtoALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaDdp3zK
    Apr  8 16:42:24.202 - alpha.baking.forge: found 0 valid operations (0 refused) for timestamp 2021-04-08T14:42:24.000-00:00 (fitness 01::0000000000000004)
    Injected block BMAHozsNCos2

Well that doesn't seem very different from what the default client would return.
Indeed, it's the same; that was the point! To see what the light client
is doing differently, you may use the environment variable ``TEZOS_LOG``.
Set it as follows:

::

    $ export TEZOS_LOG="light_mode->debug"

Variable ``light_mode`` shows how the light mode is obtaining data from
the different endpoints.

For convenience, let's define an alias before continuing, to save
keystrokes and the ``protocol of light mode unspecified`` warning:

::

    $ alias light-client="tezos-client --mode light --protocol ProtoALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaDdp3zK --sources sources.json"

And then bake a new block:

::

    $ light-client bake for bootstrap1
    Apr  8 16:49:28.172 - light_mode: light mode's core created for chain main and block head
    Apr  8 16:49:28.173 - light_mode: API call: do_rpc v1
    Apr  8 16:49:28.175 - light_mode: integrated data for key v1 from one endpoint, about to validate from 1 other
    Apr  8 16:49:28.175 - light_mode:   endpoints
    Apr  8 16:49:28.177 - light_mode: API call: get v1;constants
    Apr  8 16:49:28.177 - light_mode: API call: get v1;first_level
    Apr  8 16:49:28.177 - light_mode: API call: do_rpc pending_migration_balance_updates
    Apr  8 16:49:28.179 - light_mode: integrated data for key pending_migration_balance_updates from one endpoint,
    Apr  8 16:49:28.179 - light_mode:   about to validate from 1 other endpoints
    Apr  8 16:49:28.180 - light_mode: API call: get pending_migration_balance_updates
    ...
    ... A lot of output prefixed with light_mode: ...
    ...
    Injected block BMdbKufTymQJ

Here's the meaning of these lines:

* Line ``light mode's core created`` indicates that the light
  mode was initialized. It should be printed once per block being inspected.
* Line ``API call: do_rpc v1`` indicates that the light mode needs the
  data associated to the low-level storage's key ``v1``
* Line ``integrated data for key v1 ...`` indicates that the light mode
  obtained data for ``v1`` from a single endpoint and that it is about
  to fetch Merkle proofs for this key from other endpoints.
* Lines ``API call: get ...`` indicate that ``tezos-client`` is requesting
  data from the light mode's cache. In this snippet, after the light mode
  gathered data for key ``v1``; the client is requesting data for the children
  keys ``v1;constants`` and ``v1;first_level`` (the ``;`` indicates  nesting).
  This example shows how the light mode sometimes batches requests, to avoid
  querying many keys in a row. Here it did a single request for ``v1`` instead
  of doing one request for ``v1;constants`` and a second one
  for ``v1;first_level``.

To see that computations are done locally by the light client,
we refer to the :ref:`proxy mode<proxy-mode>`'s documentation. Debug
variables of the proxy mode apply to the light mode, as internally, the light
mode is a more complex instance of the proxy mode.

How to deploy to relieve nodes from some RPCs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Again, we refer to the corresponding section in the page of
the proxy mode :ref:`proxy mode<proxy-mode>`. The exact same recommendations
apply for the light mode.

Commit message:

docs: make light mode doc more explicit

docs/user/light.rst, after:

.. _light-mode: are done locally by the light client,

Light mode
----------

The ``tezos-client`` described in
:ref:`its own tutorial <howtouse_tezos_client>` forwards all RPCs to a node.
This page describes the *light* mode, a mode where the client
performs protocol RPCs locally; like the :ref:`proxy mode<proxy-mode>`.
However, contrary to the proxy mode, the light mode provides
a high level of security. For that it obtains data from multiple
(hopefully unrelated) endpoints and makes sure all endpoints send
the same data, by using *Merkle proofs*. Such proofs make very hard
for unrelated endpoints to craft fake data.

This mode is akin to a light client or *thin client* in Bitcoin terms.

While the existing implementation of the light mode is entirely functional,
it still has room for improvement, in particular communications over
the network can be reduced. Users are encouraged to manifest themselves,
so that enhancements to the light mode are made high priority: please
submit issues `here on GitLab <https://gitlab.com/tezos/tezos/-/issues>`_.

Executing commands in light mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The CLI interface of the client in light mode (the *light client* in short)
is the same as the default client. To turn light mode ON, you must
pass two arguments to ``tezos-client``:

* ``--mode light``, and
* ``--sources sources.json``.

The ``sources.json`` file contains:

* The list of endpoints to contact for retrieving data, as a list of URIs in the ``uris`` field.
  Because ``--sources`` must be the sole source of truth for incoming data, it
  must be a superset of ``--endpoint``. This is enforced by checking that the URI
  passed to ``--endpoint`` (if any) also appears in the ``uris`` field of the file
  passed to ``--sources``. Therefore, it is recommended to use the first
  member of the ``uris`` field as the value of ``--endpoint``.
* An optional ``min_agreement`` field, which must be a float from ``0.0`` (excluded) to ``1.0`` (included).
  This field specifies the ratio of endpoints that must agree for data
  to be accepted. The default value is ``1.0``, which means that
  all endpoints must agree for data to be considered valid (no rogue
  endpoint is tolerated).


Here is an example valid ``--sources`` file:

::

    { "min_agreement": 1.0,
      "uris": [
        "http://localhost:19733",
        "http://localhost:19735"
      ]
    }

Because computations done locally are protocol dependent, the light mode
does not support all protocols. However, at any given time, it should
support the protocol being developed (``alpha``) and the three most
recent protocols.

If ``--protocol`` is omitted when calling the light client, it
tries to match the node's protocol. On the one hand, this is handy when
testing. On the other hand, in a production environment, it is recommended
to specify ``--protocol`` if the protocol is known, to avoid an extra
RPC at **every** call ``tezos-client --mode light ...``.

Examples with the sandbox
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this section, we show examples of usage of the light mode when using
the :ref:`sandboxed node<sandboxed-mode>`. For convenience we repeat
instructions for the sandboxed mode here, but refer the reader to the
sandboxed mode page for further details. In a terminal,
start a sandboxed node:

::

    $ ./src/bin_node/tezos-sandboxed-node.sh 1 --connections 1
      # This node listens to p2p events on localhost:19731
      # RPC server of the node is reachable at localhost:18731


Leave that terminal running. In a second terminal, start another node:

::

    $ ./src/bin_node/tezos-sandboxed-node.sh 2 --connections 1
      # This node listens to p2p events on localhost:19732
      # RPC server of the node is reachable at localhost:18732

Leave that terminal running. In a third terminal, prepare the appropriate
environment for using the light client (from now on, all commands happen
in this terminal):

::

    $ eval `./src/bin_client/tezos-init-sandboxed-client.sh 1`

Then upgrade the node to protocol alpha:

::

    $ tezos-activate-alpha  # Triggers output in terminal of first node
    $ tezos-client bake for bootstrap1  # Triggers output in terminal of first node

To avoid warnings being printed in upcoming commands (optional):

::

    $ export TEZOS_CLIENT_UNSAFE_DISABLE_DISCLAIMER=y

The last step before being able to use the light client is to prepare
the JSON file to pass to ``--sources``. In our scenario, this file
specifies the two endpoints to use:

::

    $ echo '{ "uris": [ "http://localhost:18731", "http://localhost:18732" ] }' > sources.json

You're now ready to use the light client. For example, bake a block:

::

    $ tezos-client --endpoint http://localhost:18731 --mode light --sources sources.json bake for bootstrap1
    protocol of light mode unspecified, using the node's protocol: ProtoALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaDdp3zK
    Apr  8 16:42:24.202 - alpha.baking.forge: found 0 valid operations (0 refused) for timestamp 2021-04-08T14:42:24.000-00:00 (fitness 01::0000000000000004)
    Injected block BMAHozsNCos2

Well that doesn't seem very different from what the default client would return.
Indeed, it's the same; that was the point! To see what the light client
is doing differently, you may use the environment variable ``TEZOS_LOG``.
Set it as follows:

::

    $ export TEZOS_LOG="light_mode->debug"

Variable ``light_mode`` shows how the light mode is obtaining data from
the different endpoints.

For convenience, let's define an alias before continuing, to save
keystrokes and the ``protocol of light mode unspecified`` warning:

::

    $ alias light-client="tezos-client --endpoint http://localhost:18731 --mode light --protocol ProtoALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaDdp3zK --sources sources.json"

And then bake a new block:

::

    $ light-client bake for bootstrap1
    Apr  8 16:49:28.172 - light_mode: light mode's core created for chain main and block head
    Apr  8 16:49:28.173 - light_mode: API call: do_rpc v1
    Apr  8 16:49:28.175 - light_mode: integrated data for key v1 from one endpoint, about to validate from 1 other
    Apr  8 16:49:28.175 - light_mode:   endpoints
    Apr  8 16:49:28.177 - light_mode: API call: get v1;constants
    Apr  8 16:49:28.177 - light_mode: API call: get v1;first_level
    Apr  8 16:49:28.177 - light_mode: API call: do_rpc pending_migration_balance_updates
    Apr  8 16:49:28.179 - light_mode: integrated data for key pending_migration_balance_updates from one endpoint,
    Apr  8 16:49:28.179 - light_mode:   about to validate from 1 other endpoints
    Apr  8 16:49:28.180 - light_mode: API call: get pending_migration_balance_updates
    ...
    ... A lot of output prefixed with light_mode: ...
    ...
    Injected block BMdbKufTymQJ

Here's the meaning of these lines:

* Line ``light mode's core created`` indicates that the light
  mode was initialized. It should be printed once per block being inspected.
* Line ``API call: do_rpc v1`` indicates that the light mode needs the
  data associated to the low-level storage's key ``v1``
* Line ``integrated data for key v1 ...`` indicates that the light mode
  obtained data for ``v1`` from a single endpoint and that it is about
  to fetch Merkle proofs for this key from other endpoints.
* Lines ``API call: get ...`` indicate that ``tezos-client`` is requesting
  data from the light mode's cache. In this snippet, after the light mode
  gathered data for key ``v1``; the client is requesting data for the children
  keys ``v1;constants`` and ``v1;first_level`` (the ``;`` indicates  nesting).
  This example shows how the light mode sometimes batches requests, to avoid
  querying many keys in a row. Here it did a single request for ``v1`` instead
  of doing one request for ``v1;constants`` and a second one
  for ``v1;first_level``.

To see that computations are done locally by the light client,
we refer to the :ref:`proxy mode<proxy-mode>`'s documentation. Debug
variables of the proxy mode apply to the light mode, as internally, the light
mode is a more complex instance of the proxy mode.

How to deploy to relieve nodes from some RPCs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Again, we refer to the corresponding section in the page of
the proxy mode :ref:`proxy mode<proxy-mode>`. The exact same recommendations
apply for the light mode.
