docs/oxford/proof_of_stake.rst, before:

Proof-of-stake
==============

Overview
--------

:doc:`The consensus algorithm <consensus>` in Tezos is based on the
*proof-of-stake* mechanism. Proof-of-stake means that participants
in the consensus algorithm are chosen in function of their stake (the
amount of tokens a participant has). The same mechanism is used in the
Tezos :doc:`governance <voting>`.

If one does not have enough stake to participate on its own or does not want to
set up the needed infrastructure, (s)he can use :ref:`delegation
<delegating_coins>`. Therefore, in Tezos, it is the :ref:`delegates<def_delegate_oxford>`
that may participate in consensus.
However, at each level, not all delegates necessarily participate, and their participation weight may differ.
The selection of the delegates' participation rights at a level is done by running a
PRNG (pseudo-random number generator).
The PRNG's :ref:`seeds <random_seed_oxford>` are obtained from random
data that are regularly produced and stored on the blockchain. Thus,
the procedure is deterministic in that delegates' rights are uniquely
determined from the seed; and it is random, in that its seed (and hence its results) cannot
be predicted too much in advance.


Delegation
----------

A *delegate* is any :ref:`implicit account <def_implicit_account_oxford>` registered as
such. This is done by *self-delegating*, that is, emitting a delegation
operation (see below) in which the specified delegate is the same as the
operation emitter (its signer). Note that ``tz4`` accounts cannot be registered
as delegates.

Any :ref:`account <def_account_oxford>` (implicit or originated) can specify a delegate
through a delegation operation.  Any account can change or revoke its delegate
at any time, again through a delegation operation. However, the change only
becomes effective after ``PRESERVED_CYCLES + 2`` :ref:`cycles <def_cycle_oxford>`.  The
value ``PRESERVED_CYCLES`` is a :ref:`protocol constant
<protocol_constants_oxford>`.

A delegate participates in consensus and in governance with a weight
proportional to their *delegated stake* -- that is, the balance
of all the accounts that delegate to it, including the balance of the delegate itself. To
participate in consensus or in governance, a
delegate needs to have at least a minimal stake, which is given by the
``MINIMAL_STAKE`` :ref:`protocol constant
<protocol_constants_oxford>`.

Delegates place security deposits that may be forfeited in case they do not
follow (some particular rules of) the protocol. Security deposits are deduced
from the delegates' own balance.

The key used by a delegate to sign blocks and consensus operations is called the
*consensus key*. By default, this is the delegate's private key, called its
*manager key*. However, a delegate may specify another, dedicated key for this
role. See :ref:`this page<consensus_key>` for further important details. In particular,
both the delegate key and the consensus key give total control over the
delegate's funds: indeed, the consensus key may sign a *drain* operation to
transfer the delegate's free balance to an arbitrary account.  In :doc:`relevant RPCs<../api/openapi>`,
like ``/chains/main/blocks/head/helpers/baking_rights``, both the delegate's
manager and consensus keys are listed.


Active and passive delegates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _active_delegate_oxford:

A delegate can be marked as either active or passive. A passive
delegate cannot participate in the consensus algorithm.

A delegate is marked as active at its registration.

A delegate becomes passive at the end of cycle ``n`` when it has
failed to participate in the consensus algorithm in
the past ``PRESERVED_CYCLES + 1`` cycles. That is, in cycles ``n``, ``n-1``,
``n-2``, ..., ``n - PRESERVED_CYCLES``.

Delegates' rights selection
---------------------------

Tezos being proof-of-stake, the delegates' rights are selected at random based on their
stake. In what follows we detail the selection mechanism used in Tezos.

.. _random_seed_oxford:

Random seed
^^^^^^^^^^^

To each cycle is associated a random number called the
seed. This seed is used within its cycle to generate pseudo-random
values in the protocol, in particular for selecting delegates to participate in consensus.

For more information on randomness generation, see :doc:`randomness-generation<randomness_generation>`.

.. _snapshots_oxford:

Stake snapshots
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Before turning to the rights selection mechanism, we first introduce a new
terminology, *stake snapshot*, to denote the stake distribution for a given block,
as stored in the :ref:`context<def_context_oxford>`.
Stake snapshots are taken (and stored) every ``BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT`` levels.
More precisely, a snapshot is taken at a level if and only if its cycle
position modulo ``BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT`` is ``BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT - 1``.
Therefore, at the end of a cycle there are ``BLOCKS_PER_CYCLE /
BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT`` stored snapshots.

At the end of cycle ``n-1-PRESERVED_CYCLES``, the snapshot for cycle
``n`` is randomly selected from the snapshots stored in cycle
``n-1-PRESERVED_CYCLES``. The selection is done through a very simple
PRNG having as seed the :ref:`random seed<random_seed_oxford>` for
cycle ``n``.

Only the stake of active delegates with the minimal stake of ``MINIMAL_STAKE`` is snapshot.

.. _rights_oxford:

Slot selection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Delegates' rights to participate are determined using the `alias
method <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alias_method>`_, more precisely
using `Vose's algorithm
<https://web.archive.org/web/20131029203736/http://web.eecs.utk.edu/~vose/Publications/random.pdf>`_
(see also `this more pedagogic description
<https://www.keithschwarz.com/darts-dice-coins/>`_; the algorithm is the last one listed there).
This algorithm samples from a discrete probability distribution, which is given by
the stakes in a particular stake snapshot: the probability to sample a
particular delegate is its stake in the snapshot over the total stake
in that snapshot.

Concretely, the delegates' rights at a given level are expressed in terms of
the (quantity of) *slots* that the delegate owns at that level.
This quantity represents the delegate's weight in consensus.
We note that, in the long run (that is, on average over many levels), the number of slots is proportional to its stake.
The owner of a slot is obtained by sampling using the algorithm
mentioned above.
More precisely, given a level and a slot (which is just a non-negative integer),
the mentioned algorithm is invoked to assign a delegate to the given slot.
Its input is the probability distribution given by the :ref:`stake
snapshot<snapshots_oxford>` for the cycle to which the level belongs.
And whenever the algorithm needs to draw a random value, this is obtained using a
simple procedure which has as its initial state: the level, the
:ref:`random seed<random_seed_oxford>` for the cycle to which the
level belongs, and the slot.


.. _ps_constants_oxford:

Proof-of-stake parameters
-------------------------

.. list-table::
   :widths: 55 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Parameter name
     - Parameter value
   * - ``BLOCKS_PER_CYCLE``
     - 16384 blocks
   * - ``PRESERVED_CYCLES``
     - 5 cycles
   * - ``MINIMAL_STAKE``
     - 6,000 ꜩ
   * - ``BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT``
     - 1024 blocks


Further External Resources
--------------------------

The original design of the proof-of-stake mechanism in Tezos can be
found in the `whitepaper
<https://tezos.com/whitepaper.pdf>`_.

Other presentations of the Tezos' proof-of-stake mechanism can be
found in the `Tezos Agora wiki entry
<https://wiki.tezosagora.org/learn/baking/proofofstake>`_ and
`Open Tezos entry <https://opentezos.com/tezos-basics/liquid-proof-of-stake/>`_.

Commit message:

doc: document minimal_frozen_stake in oxford/PoS

docs/oxford/proof_of_stake.rst, after:

Proof-of-stake
==============

Overview
--------

:doc:`The consensus algorithm <consensus>` in Tezos is based on the
*proof-of-stake* mechanism. Proof-of-stake means that participants
in the consensus algorithm are chosen in function of their stake (the
amount of tokens a participant has). The same mechanism is used in the
Tezos :doc:`governance <voting>`.

If one does not have enough stake to participate on its own or does not want to
set up the needed infrastructure, (s)he can use :ref:`delegation
<delegating_coins>`. Therefore, in Tezos, it is the :ref:`delegates<def_delegate_oxford>`
that may participate in consensus.
However, at each level, not all delegates necessarily participate, and their participation weight may differ.
The selection of the delegates' participation rights at a level is done by running a
PRNG (pseudo-random number generator).
The PRNG's :ref:`seeds <random_seed_oxford>` are obtained from random
data that are regularly produced and stored on the blockchain. Thus,
the procedure is deterministic in that delegates' rights are uniquely
determined from the seed; and it is random, in that its seed (and hence its results) cannot
be predicted too much in advance.


Delegation
----------

A *delegate* is any :ref:`implicit account <def_implicit_account_oxford>` registered as
such. This is done by *self-delegating*, that is, emitting a delegation
operation (see below) in which the specified delegate is the same as the
operation emitter (its signer). Note that ``tz4`` accounts cannot be registered
as delegates.

Any :ref:`account <def_account_oxford>` (implicit or originated) can specify a delegate
through a delegation operation.  Any account can change or revoke its delegate
at any time, again through a delegation operation. However, the change only
becomes effective after ``PRESERVED_CYCLES + 2`` :ref:`cycles <def_cycle_oxford>`.  The
value ``PRESERVED_CYCLES`` is a :ref:`protocol constant
<protocol_constants_oxford>`.

A delegate participates in consensus and in governance with a weight
proportional to their *delegated stake* -- that is, the balance
of all the accounts that delegate to it, including the balance of the delegate itself. To
participate in consensus or in governance, a
delegate needs to have at least a minimal stake, which is given by the
``MINIMAL_STAKE`` :ref:`protocol constant
<protocol_constants_oxford>` and a minimal frozen stake given by the
``MINIMAL_FROZEN_STAKE`` :ref:`protocol constant
<protocol_constants_oxford>`.

Delegates place security deposits that may be forfeited in case they do not
follow (some particular rules of) the protocol. Security deposits are deduced
from the delegates' own balance.

The key used by a delegate to sign blocks and consensus operations is called the
*consensus key*. By default, this is the delegate's private key, called its
*manager key*. However, a delegate may specify another, dedicated key for this
role. See :ref:`this page<consensus_key>` for further important details. In particular,
both the delegate key and the consensus key give total control over the
delegate's funds: indeed, the consensus key may sign a *drain* operation to
transfer the delegate's free balance to an arbitrary account.  In :doc:`relevant RPCs<../api/openapi>`,
like ``/chains/main/blocks/head/helpers/baking_rights``, both the delegate's
manager and consensus keys are listed.


Active and passive delegates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _active_delegate_oxford:

A delegate can be marked as either active or passive. A passive
delegate cannot participate in the consensus algorithm.

A delegate is marked as active at its registration.

A delegate becomes passive at the end of cycle ``n`` when it has
failed to participate in the consensus algorithm in
the past ``PRESERVED_CYCLES + 1`` cycles. That is, in cycles ``n``, ``n-1``,
``n-2``, ..., ``n - PRESERVED_CYCLES``.

Delegates' rights selection
---------------------------

Tezos being proof-of-stake, the delegates' rights are selected at random based on their
stake. In what follows we detail the selection mechanism used in Tezos.

.. _random_seed_oxford:

Random seed
^^^^^^^^^^^

To each cycle is associated a random number called the
seed. This seed is used within its cycle to generate pseudo-random
values in the protocol, in particular for selecting delegates to participate in consensus.

For more information on randomness generation, see :doc:`randomness-generation<randomness_generation>`.

.. _snapshots_oxford:

Stake snapshots
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Before turning to the rights selection mechanism, we first introduce a new
terminology, *stake snapshot*, to denote the stake distribution for a given block,
as stored in the :ref:`context<def_context_oxford>`.
Stake snapshots are taken (and stored) every ``BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT`` levels.
More precisely, a snapshot is taken at a level if and only if its cycle
position modulo ``BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT`` is ``BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT - 1``.
Therefore, at the end of a cycle there are ``BLOCKS_PER_CYCLE /
BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT`` stored snapshots.

At the end of cycle ``n-1-PRESERVED_CYCLES``, the snapshot for cycle
``n`` is randomly selected from the snapshots stored in cycle
``n-1-PRESERVED_CYCLES``. The selection is done through a very simple
PRNG having as seed the :ref:`random seed<random_seed_oxford>` for
cycle ``n``.

Only the stake of active delegates with the minimal stake of ``MINIMAL_STAKE``
and frozen deposits greater than ``MINIMAL_FROZEN_STAKE`` is snapshotted.

.. _rights_oxford:

Slot selection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Delegates' rights to participate are determined using the `alias
method <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alias_method>`_, more precisely
using `Vose's algorithm
<https://web.archive.org/web/20131029203736/http://web.eecs.utk.edu/~vose/Publications/random.pdf>`_
(see also `this more pedagogic description
<https://www.keithschwarz.com/darts-dice-coins/>`_; the algorithm is the last one listed there).
This algorithm samples from a discrete probability distribution, which is given by
the stakes in a particular stake snapshot: the probability to sample a
particular delegate is its stake in the snapshot over the total stake
in that snapshot.

Concretely, the delegates' rights at a given level are expressed in terms of
the (quantity of) *slots* that the delegate owns at that level.
This quantity represents the delegate's weight in consensus.
We note that, in the long run (that is, on average over many levels), the number of slots is proportional to its stake.
The owner of a slot is obtained by sampling using the algorithm
mentioned above.
More precisely, given a level and a slot (which is just a non-negative integer),
the mentioned algorithm is invoked to assign a delegate to the given slot.
Its input is the probability distribution given by the :ref:`stake
snapshot<snapshots_oxford>` for the cycle to which the level belongs.
And whenever the algorithm needs to draw a random value, this is obtained using a
simple procedure which has as its initial state: the level, the
:ref:`random seed<random_seed_oxford>` for the cycle to which the
level belongs, and the slot.


.. _ps_constants_oxford:

Proof-of-stake parameters
-------------------------

.. list-table::
   :widths: 55 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Parameter name
     - Parameter value
   * - ``BLOCKS_PER_CYCLE``
     - 16384 blocks
   * - ``PRESERVED_CYCLES``
     - 5 cycles
   * - ``MINIMAL_STAKE``
     - 6,000 ꜩ
   * - ``MINIMAL_FROZEN_STAKE``
     - 600 ꜩ
   * - ``BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT``
     - 1024 blocks


Further External Resources
--------------------------

The original design of the proof-of-stake mechanism in Tezos can be
found in the `whitepaper
<https://tezos.com/whitepaper.pdf>`_.

Other presentations of the Tezos' proof-of-stake mechanism can be
found in the `Tezos Agora wiki entry
<https://wiki.tezosagora.org/learn/baking/proofofstake>`_ and
`Open Tezos entry <https://opentezos.com/tezos-basics/liquid-proof-of-stake/>`_.
