docs/010/proof_of_stake.rst, before:

Proof-of-stake
==============

Overview
--------

:doc:`The consensus algorithm <consensus>` in Tezos is based on the
*proof-of-stake* mechanism. Proof-of-stake means that participants
in the consensus algorithm are chosen in function of their stake (the
amount of tokens a participant has). The same mechanism is used in the
Tezos :doc:`governance <voting>`.

If one does not have enough stake to participate on its own or does not want to
set up the needed infrastructure, (s)he can use :ref:`delegation
<delegating_coins>`. Therefore, in Tezos, it is the :ref:`delegates<Delegate>`
that may participate in consensus. Delegates' rights to participate are
determined by a `follow-the-coin strategy
<https://wiki.tezosagora.org/whitepaper#follow-the-coin-procedure>`_. This
procedure is random, in that its result cannot be predicted too much in advance.
The :ref:`randomness<random_seed_010>` is obtained from information already found on the
blockchain. Thus, the procedure is also deterministic: delegates' rights are
uniquely determined from the random element.

Delegation
----------

A *delegate* is any :ref:`implicit account <Implicit account>` registered as
such by emitting a delegate registration operation.

Any :ref:`accounts <Account>` (implicit or originated) can specify a delegate
through a delegation operation.


Any account can change or revoke its delegate at any time. However, the change
only becomes effective after ``PRESERVED_CYCLES + 2`` :ref:`cycles <Cycle>`.

A delegate participates in consensus and in governance with a weight
proportional with their delegated stake, which includes the balances of
all the accounts that delegate to it, and also the balance of the
delegate itself.

Delegates place security deposits that may be forfeited in case they do not
follow (some particular rules of) the protocol. Security deposits are deduced
from the delegates' own balance. Therefore delegates may be subject to
:ref:`over-delegation<over_delegation>`.


Active and passive delegates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _active_delegate_010:

A delegate can be marked as either active or passive. A passive
delegate cannot participate in the consensus algorithm.

A delegate is marked as active at its registration.

A delegate becomes passive for cycle ``n`` when they
fail to participate in the consensus algorithm in
the past ``PRESERVED_CYCLES`` cycles, that is, in cycles ``n-1``,
``n-2``, ..., ``n - PRESERVED_CYCLES``.

Delegates' rights selection
---------------------------

Tezos being proof-of-stake, the delegates' rights are selected at random based on their
stake. In theory, it would be possible to give each token a serial number and
track the specific tokens assigned to specific delegates. However, it would be
too demanding of nodes to track assignments at such a granular level. Instead,
Tezos works with *sets of tokens* which are called *rolls*.

.. _roll_pos_010:

Rolls
^^^^^

A roll holds ``TOKENS_PER_ROLL`` tokens. When tokens are moved, or a delegate for an
account is changed, the rolls change delegate according to the following
algorithm.

Each delegate has a stack of roll identifiers plus some "change" which is always
an amount smaller than ``TOKENS_PER_ROLL``. When tokens are moved from one
delegate to the other, first, the change is used. If it is not enough, rolls
need to be "broken" which means that they move from the delegate stack to a
global, unallocated, roll stack. This is done until the amount is covered, and
some change possibly remains.

Then, the other delegate is credited. First, the amount is added to the
"change". If it becomes greater than ``TOKENS_PER_ROLL``, then rolls are
unstacked from the global unallocated roll stack onto the delegate stack. If the
global stack is empty, a fresh roll is created.

This preserves the property that if the delegate is changed through several
transactions, the roll assignment is preserved, even if each operation moves
less than a full roll.

The advantage of tracking tokens in this way is that a delegate creating a
malicious fork cannot easily change the specific rolls assigned to them, even if
they control the underlying tokens and shuffle them around.

.. _random_seed_010:

Random seed
^^^^^^^^^^^

Each cycle ``n`` is associated with a random seed. The random seed for cycle
``n`` is a 256-bit number generated at the very end of cycle ``n-1`` from
*nonces* to which delegates commit during cycle ``n-2``. One block out of every
``BLOCKS_PER_COMMITMENT`` can contain a commitment. A commitment is the hash of
a nonce. The commitment is generated by the block proposer and is included in
the block header.

The committed nonce must be revealed by the original block proposer during cycle
``n-1`` under penalty of forfeiting the rewards and fees of the block that
included the commitment. The associated security deposit is not forfeited.

A *nonce revelation* is an operation, and multiple nonce revelations can thus be
included in a block. A reward ``SEED_NONCE_REVELATION_TIP`` is given for
including a revelation. Revelations are free operations which do not compete
with transactions for block space. Up to ``MAX_ANON_OPS_PER_BLOCK`` revelations,
wallet activations and denunciations can be contained in any given block.

The seed for cycle ``n`` is obtained as follows: the seed of cycle ``n-1`` is
hashed with a constant and then with each nonce revealed in cycle ``n-1``.

.. _rights_010:

Slot selection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To return to the rights selection mechanism, we first introduce a new
terminology, *roll snapshot*, to denote the stored (in the
:ref:`context <Context>`) distribution of rolls for a given block. Roll
snapshots are taken (and stored) every ``BLOCKS_PER_ROLL_SNAPSHOT``
blocks.

The delegates' rights at a given level and for a particular role in
the protocol are expressed in terms of *slots* that the delegate
receives for that role. The slot owner is obtained by running a PRNG
(pseudo-random number generator) with the following input:

- the level
- the role (a string)
- the slot (a non-negative integer)

Let `n` be the cycle the level belongs to.
The seed of the PRNG is the :ref:`random seed <random_seed_010>` associated with cycle ``n-PRESERVED_CYCLES``.
The PRNG first selects a snapshot from cycle ``n-PRESERVED_CYCLES-2`` and then it selects a roll in the selected snapshot.
The slot owner is then the roll owner.


.. _ps_constants_010:

Parameters
----------

.. list-table::
   :widths: 55 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Parameter name
     - Parameter value
   * - ``BLOCKS_PER_CYCLE``
     - 8192 blocks
   * - ``PRESERVED_CYCLES``
     - 5 cycles
   * - ``BLOCKS_PER_COMMITMENT``
     - 64 blocks
   * -  ``MAX_ANON_OPS_PER_BLOCK``
     - 132 revelations
   * - ``SEED_NONCE_REVELATION_TIP``
     -  1/8 ꜩ
   * - ``TOKENS_PER_ROLL``
     - 8,000 ꜩ
   * - ``BLOCKS_PER_ROLL_SNAPSHOT``
     - 512 blocks


Further External Resources
--------------------------

The original design of the proof-of-stake mechanism in Tezos can be
found in the `whitepaper
<https://whitepaper.io/document/376/tezos-whitepaper>`_.

Another presentation of the Tezos' proof-of-stake mechanism can be
found in the `Tezos agora wiki entry
<https://wiki.tezosagora.org/learn/baking/proofofstake/consensus>`_.

Commit message:

doc: add back section Protocol constants

docs/010/proof_of_stake.rst, after:

Proof-of-stake
==============

Overview
--------

:doc:`The consensus algorithm <consensus>` in Tezos is based on the
*proof-of-stake* mechanism. Proof-of-stake means that participants
in the consensus algorithm are chosen in function of their stake (the
amount of tokens a participant has). The same mechanism is used in the
Tezos :doc:`governance <voting>`.

If one does not have enough stake to participate on its own or does not want to
set up the needed infrastructure, (s)he can use :ref:`delegation
<delegating_coins>`. Therefore, in Tezos, it is the :ref:`delegates<Delegate>`
that may participate in consensus. Delegates' rights to participate are
determined by a `follow-the-coin strategy
<https://wiki.tezosagora.org/whitepaper#follow-the-coin-procedure>`_. This
procedure is random, in that its result cannot be predicted too much in advance.
The :ref:`randomness<random_seed_010>` is obtained from information already found on the
blockchain. Thus, the procedure is also deterministic: delegates' rights are
uniquely determined from the random element.

Delegation
----------

A *delegate* is any :ref:`implicit account <Implicit account>` registered as
such by emitting a delegate registration operation.

Any :ref:`accounts <Account>` (implicit or originated) can specify a delegate
through a delegation operation.


Any account can change or revoke its delegate at any time. However, the change
only becomes effective after ``PRESERVED_CYCLES + 2`` :ref:`cycles <Cycle>`.
The value ``PRESERVED_CYCLES`` is a
:ref:`protocol constant <protocol_constants_010>`.

A delegate participates in consensus and in governance with a weight
proportional with their delegated stake, which includes the balances of
all the accounts that delegate to it, and also the balance of the
delegate itself.

Delegates place security deposits that may be forfeited in case they do not
follow (some particular rules of) the protocol. Security deposits are deduced
from the delegates' own balance. Therefore delegates may be subject to
:ref:`over-delegation<over_delegation>`.


Active and passive delegates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _active_delegate_010:

A delegate can be marked as either active or passive. A passive
delegate cannot participate in the consensus algorithm.

A delegate is marked as active at its registration.

A delegate becomes passive for cycle ``n`` when they
fail to participate in the consensus algorithm in
the past ``PRESERVED_CYCLES`` cycles, that is, in cycles ``n-1``,
``n-2``, ..., ``n - PRESERVED_CYCLES``.

Delegates' rights selection
---------------------------

Tezos being proof-of-stake, the delegates' rights are selected at random based on their
stake. In theory, it would be possible to give each token a serial number and
track the specific tokens assigned to specific delegates. However, it would be
too demanding of nodes to track assignments at such a granular level. Instead,
Tezos works with *sets of tokens* which are called *rolls*.

.. _roll_pos_010:

Rolls
^^^^^

A roll holds ``TOKENS_PER_ROLL`` tokens. When tokens are moved, or a delegate for an
account is changed, the rolls change delegate according to the following
algorithm.

Each delegate has a stack of roll identifiers plus some "change" which is always
an amount smaller than ``TOKENS_PER_ROLL``. When tokens are moved from one
delegate to the other, first, the change is used. If it is not enough, rolls
need to be "broken" which means that they move from the delegate stack to a
global, unallocated, roll stack. This is done until the amount is covered, and
some change possibly remains.

Then, the other delegate is credited. First, the amount is added to the
"change". If it becomes greater than ``TOKENS_PER_ROLL``, then rolls are
unstacked from the global unallocated roll stack onto the delegate stack. If the
global stack is empty, a fresh roll is created.

This preserves the property that if the delegate is changed through several
transactions, the roll assignment is preserved, even if each operation moves
less than a full roll.

The advantage of tracking tokens in this way is that a delegate creating a
malicious fork cannot easily change the specific rolls assigned to them, even if
they control the underlying tokens and shuffle them around.

.. _random_seed_010:

Random seed
^^^^^^^^^^^

Each cycle ``n`` is associated with a random seed. The random seed for cycle
``n`` is a 256-bit number generated at the very end of cycle ``n-1`` from
*nonces* to which delegates commit during cycle ``n-2``. One block out of every
``BLOCKS_PER_COMMITMENT`` can contain a commitment. A commitment is the hash of
a nonce. The commitment is generated by the block proposer and is included in
the block header.

The committed nonce must be revealed by the original block proposer during cycle
``n-1`` under penalty of forfeiting the rewards and fees of the block that
included the commitment. The associated security deposit is not forfeited.

A *nonce revelation* is an operation, and multiple nonce revelations can thus be
included in a block. A reward ``SEED_NONCE_REVELATION_TIP`` is given for
including a revelation. Revelations are free operations which do not compete
with transactions for block space. Up to ``MAX_ANON_OPS_PER_BLOCK`` revelations,
wallet activations and denunciations can be contained in any given block.

The seed for cycle ``n`` is obtained as follows: the seed of cycle ``n-1`` is
hashed with a constant and then with each nonce revealed in cycle ``n-1``.

.. _rights_010:

Slot selection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To return to the rights selection mechanism, we first introduce a new
terminology, *roll snapshot*, to denote the stored (in the
:ref:`context <Context>`) distribution of rolls for a given block. Roll
snapshots are taken (and stored) every ``BLOCKS_PER_ROLL_SNAPSHOT``
blocks.

The delegates' rights at a given level and for a particular role in
the protocol are expressed in terms of *slots* that the delegate
receives for that role. The slot owner is obtained by running a PRNG
(pseudo-random number generator) with the following input:

- the level
- the role (a string)
- the slot (a non-negative integer)

Let `n` be the cycle the level belongs to.
The seed of the PRNG is the :ref:`random seed <random_seed_010>` associated with cycle ``n-PRESERVED_CYCLES``.
The PRNG first selects a snapshot from cycle ``n-PRESERVED_CYCLES-2`` and then it selects a roll in the selected snapshot.
The slot owner is then the roll owner.

.. _protocol_constants_010:

Protocol constants
------------------

Protocols are parameterized by several parameters called *protocol constants*, which may vary from one protocol to another or from one network to another (for instance, test networks move faster).
An example of a parameter is the number of tez constituting a roll. This number is given by the constant named ``TOKENS_PER_ROLL``.

The list of protocol constants can be found in the API of the `Constants module <https://tezos.gitlab.io/api/odoc/_html/tezos-protocol-alpha/Tezos_raw_protocol_alpha/Alpha_context/Constants/index.html>`__.

The values of protocol constants can be found using a :ref:`specific RPC call <GET_..--block_id--context--constants>`, as shown in :ref:`this example <get_protocol_constants>`.

In particular, the protocol constants related to the proof-of-stake mechanism are detailed below.

.. _ps_constants_010:

Proof-of-stake parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. list-table::
   :widths: 55 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Parameter name
     - Parameter value
   * - ``BLOCKS_PER_CYCLE``
     - 8192 blocks
   * - ``PRESERVED_CYCLES``
     - 5 cycles
   * - ``BLOCKS_PER_COMMITMENT``
     - 64 blocks
   * -  ``MAX_ANON_OPS_PER_BLOCK``
     - 132 revelations
   * - ``SEED_NONCE_REVELATION_TIP``
     -  1/8 ꜩ
   * - ``TOKENS_PER_ROLL``
     - 8,000 ꜩ
   * - ``BLOCKS_PER_ROLL_SNAPSHOT``
     - 512 blocks


Further External Resources
--------------------------

The original design of the proof-of-stake mechanism in Tezos can be
found in the `whitepaper
<https://whitepaper.io/document/376/tezos-whitepaper>`_.

Another presentation of the Tezos' proof-of-stake mechanism can be
found in the `Tezos agora wiki entry
<https://wiki.tezosagora.org/learn/baking/proofofstake/consensus>`_.
