docs/alpha/event.rst, before:

Contract events
===============

Contract events provide a way for contracts to deliver event-like information to external applications.
This mechanism allows off-chain applications to react to Tezos contracts execution.


Sending events
--------------
Contract events can be emitted by invoking the Michelson instruction ``EMIT``.
``EMIT %tag ty`` pops an item of type ``ty`` off the stack and pushes an ``operation`` onto the stack.
The type ascription ``ty`` is special since annotations in ``ty`` are preserved and eventually transmitted
in the event so that indexers have a choice to present the event body with appropriate labels.
Both the ``ty`` type ascription and ``%tag`` are optional.
If ``ty`` is absent, this type is inferred from the type of the top element of the stack.
If ``%tag`` is absent, no tag is attached to the event.

To actually send out the events, most importantly, the produced ``operation``\s must be included in the list of
operations, along with ``TRANSFER_TOKEN`` operations for example, that the contract wants to effect.

Event
-----

Each successful contract execution attaches into the transaction receipt a list of contract events
arranged in the order of appearance in the resultant list of operations.
There, the events are made ready for consumption by services observing the chain.

Example
-------
Suppose a contract wants to emit events with the following type:

::

    or (nat %int) (string %str)

Then, this contract may generate an event emission operation with the following instructions.
Note that the ``EMIT`` instruction will emit an event with a tag ``notify_client``.
In addition, it allows indexers to recognise the two variants as ``int`` and ``str`` and,
therefore, be able to present the values with the appropriate variant labels.

::

    PUSH string "right";
    RIGHT nat;
    EMIT %notify_client (or (nat %int) (string %str));


Retrieving events
-----------------
Events successfully emitted can be read off directly from transaction results.
This is typically achieved by making JSON RPCs to the block service.
It will return a list of operations, each including the event entries with the information above.

Here is a sample result from a call, corresponding to the example above.

::

    {
      "protocol": "ProtoALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaDdp3zK",
      "hash": "opNX59asPwNZGu2kFiHFVJzn7QwtyaExoLtxdZSm3Q3o4jDdSmo",
      // ... fields elided for brevity
      "contents": [
        {
          "kind": "transaction",
          // ... fields elided for brevity
          "metadata": {
            // ... fields elided for brevity
            "internal_operation_results": [
              {
                "kind": "event",
                // ... fields elided for brevity
                "source": "KT1M1ynE3YXkM7qLZoMppq6szMbBvxX9yQVL",
                "nonce": 0,
                "type": {
                   "prim": "or",
                   "args": [
                     {
                       "prim": "nat",
                       "annots": [
                         "%int"
                       ]
                     },
                     {
                       "prim": "string",
                       "annots": [
                         "%str"
                       ]
                     }
                   ]
                },
                "tag": "notify_client",
                "payload": {
                  "prim": "Right",
                  "args": [
                    {
                      "string": "right"
                    }
                  ]
                },
                "result": {
                  "status": "applied",
                  "consumed_milligas": "1000000"
                }
              }
            ]
          }
        }
      ]
    }

Note that the ``operation`` produced by ``EMIT`` does not constitute a call to any other contract.

Commit message:

doc: review Contract events page

docs/alpha/event.rst, after:

Contract events
===============

Contract events provide a way for smart contracts to deliver live information to external applications.
This mechanism allows off-chain applications to react to Tezos contracts execution.

.. note::

  Contract events should not be confused with :doc:`log events <../user/logging>`, which are generated by the various Octez tools to include information about their execution in their own logs.

This page explains how events can be generated using specific support in the :doc:`Michelson language <../active/michelson>`.
For using events in higher-level languages for smart contracts, consult their own documentation.

Emitting events
---------------

Contracts can create event emission operations by invoking the Michelson instruction ``EMIT``.
``EMIT %tag ty`` pops an item of type ``ty`` off the stack and pushes an ``operation`` onto the stack.
The type ascription ``ty`` is special since annotations in ``ty`` are preserved and eventually transmitted
in the event so that indexers have a choice to present the event body with appropriate labels.
Both the ``ty`` type ascription and ``%tag`` are optional.
If ``ty`` is absent, this type is inferred from the type of the top element of the stack.
If ``%tag`` is absent, no tag is attached to the event.

To actually send out the events, most importantly, the produced ``operation``\s must be included in the list of
operations returned by the contract, along with ``TRANSFER_TOKEN`` operations for example.

Upon successful contract execution, the events appearing in the resultant list of operations will be attached, in the order of appearance, to the transaction receipt.
There, the events are made ready for consumption by services observing the chain.

Example
~~~~~~~

Suppose a contract wants to emit events with the following type:

::

    or (nat %int) (string %str)

Then, this contract may generate an event emission operation with the following instructions::

    PUSH string "right";
    RIGHT nat;
    EMIT %notify_client (or (nat %int) (string %str));

Note that the ``EMIT`` instruction will emit an event with a tag ``notify_client``.
The additional tags ``int`` and ``str``, allow indexers to recognise the two variants and present the values with the appropriate variant labels.

Retrieving events
-----------------

Events successfully emitted can be read off from transaction results.

This is typically achieved by making JSON RPCs to the block service.
It will return a list of operations, each including the event entries with the information above.

Here is a sample result from a call, corresponding to the example above.

::

    {
      "protocol": "ProtoALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaALphaDdp3zK",
      "hash": "opNX59asPwNZGu2kFiHFVJzn7QwtyaExoLtxdZSm3Q3o4jDdSmo",
      // ... fields elided for brevity
      "contents": [
        {
          "kind": "transaction",
          // ... fields elided for brevity
          "metadata": {
            // ... fields elided for brevity
            "internal_operation_results": [
              {
                "kind": "event",
                // ... fields elided for brevity
                "source": "KT1M1ynE3YXkM7qLZoMppq6szMbBvxX9yQVL",
                "nonce": 0,
                "type": {
                   "prim": "or",
                   "args": [
                     {
                       "prim": "nat",
                       "annots": [
                         "%int"
                       ]
                     },
                     {
                       "prim": "string",
                       "annots": [
                         "%str"
                       ]
                     }
                   ]
                },
                "tag": "notify_client",
                "payload": {
                  "prim": "Right",
                  "args": [
                    {
                      "string": "right"
                    }
                  ]
                },
                "result": {
                  "status": "applied",
                  "consumed_milligas": "1000000"
                }
              }
            ]
          }
        }
      ]
    }

Note that the ``operation`` produced by ``EMIT`` does not constitute a call to any other contract.
