docs/shell/validation.rst, before:

The validation subsystem
========================

This document explains the inner workings of the validation subsystem
of the Tezos shell, that sits between the peer-to-peer layer and the
economic protocol. This part is in charge of validating chains, blocks
and operations that come from the network, and deciding whether they
are worthy to propagate. It is composed of three main parts: the
:ref:`validator<validator_component>`, the
:ref:`prevalidator<prevalidator_component>`, and
the :ref:`distributed DB<DDB_component>`.

|Tezos validation diagram|

Concepts
--------

Before presenting these three components, we define some basic concepts.

Block
~~~~~

The Tezos blockchain is a linked list of blocks (or actually, a tree when several competing branches exist).
Blocks conceptually contain a header and a list of operations.
In the implementation, the list of operations in the block is represented as the hash of the Merkle tree containing them.

The header itself decomposes into a shell header (common to all protocols) and a protocol-specific header.

Fitness
~~~~~~~

To each block, we associate a measure of fitness which determines the quality of the chain leading to that block.
This measure is computed by the consensus protocol.
The shell changes the head of the chain to the valid block that has the highest fitness.

The fitness belongs to the shell part of the block header.
The shell does not know the exact representation of the fitness, except that it has a total order on it.


.. _shell_header:

Shell header
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The shell header contains:

-  ``level``: the height of the block, from the genesis block.
-  ``proto``: number of protocol changes since genesis (modulo 256).
-  ``predecessor``: the hash of the preceding block.
-  ``timestamp``: the timestamp at which the block is claimed to have
   been created.
-  ``validation_pass``: number of validation passes. Indeed, operations
   included in a block may be validated in several passes. This enables some
   kind of operations (e.g., consensus operations) to be validated in priority.
-  ``operations_hash``: Hash of the list of lists (actually root hashes of
   Merkle trees) of operations included in the block. There is one list of
   operations per validation pass.
-  ``fitness``: a sequence of sequences of unsigned bytes, shortlex-ordered (by
   length and then lexicographically). It represents the claimed fitness
   of the chain ending in this block.
-  ``context``: the hash of the state of the context after application of
   this block.

The rest of this page presents the three components of the validation subsystem.

.. _validator_component:

Validator
---------

The validator is the component responsible for checking that blocks
coming from the network or a baker are valid, w.r.t. the rules defined
by the economic protocol, and for selecting the block that it
considers to be the current head of the blockchain, based on its fitness.

The validator is written as a collection of workers: local event loops
communicating with each other via message passing. Workers are spawned
and killed dynamically, according to connected peers, incoming blocks
to validate, and active (test)chains.

A *chain validator* worker is launched by the validator for each
*chain* that it considers alive. Each chain validator is responsible for
handling blocks that belong to this chain, and select the best head for
this chain. A chain validator is spawned for the main chain that
starts at the genesis, a second one when there is an active test
chain. Forking a chain is decided from within the economic protocol.  In
protocol Alpha, this is only used to try new protocols before self
amending the main chain.

The chain validator spawns one *peer validator* worker per connected
peer. The set of peer validators is updated, grown, or shrunk on the fly, according to the
connections and disconnections signals from the peer-to-peer component.
Each peer validator will treat new head proposals from the associated
peer, one at a time, in a loop. In the simple case, when a peer
receives a new head proposal that is a direct successor of the current
local head, it launches a simple *head increment* task: it retrieves
all the operations and triggers a validation of the block. When the
difference between the current head and the examined proposal is
more than one block, mostly during the initial bootstrap phase, the
peer worker launches a *bootstrap pipeline* task.

A third scheme is planned (but not yet implemented) for validating
alternative chains: the *multipass validator*. This method is quite
more complex, its goal is to detect erroneous blocks as soon as
possible, without having to download all the chain data. This process
will work by first validating the block headers, then the operations
that act on the fitness, and finally the remaining operations. The
mechanism is actually a bit more flexible and allows for an arbitrary
number of lists of operations. The shell will only consider forks of a
given length, that is exported by the protocol, so that block headers
and operations are validated in the context of an ancestor block that
is in a close enough time window. In protocol Alpha, the check
performed on block headers is that the baking slots, baker signatures,
and timestamp deltas are right. It can also detect too large fitness
gaps, as the fitness difference between two consecutive blocks is
bounded in Alpha. The operations that act on fitness are endorsements,
whose checks consist in verifying the endorsement slots and endorsers'
signatures. For that to be sound, the fork limit is set to not allow
rewinding before the baking and endorsing slots are set.

Each of these three peer validator tasks (head increment, bootstrap
pipeline, or multipass) will interact with the distributed DB to get
the data they need (block headers and operations). When they have
everything needed for a block, they will call the *block validator*.

The *block validator* validates blocks (currently in sequence),
assuming that all the necessary data have already been retrieved from
the peer-to-peer network. When a block is valid, it will notify the
corresponding chain validator, that may update its head. In this case,
the chain validator will propagate this information to its associated
*prevalidator*, and may decide to kill or spawn the test network
according to the protocol's decision.

.. _prevalidator_component:

Prevalidator
------------

To each chain validator is associated a *prevalidator* (this may become
an option in the future, to allow running nodes on machines with less
RAM), that is responsible for the transmission of operations for this
chain over the peer-to-peer network.

To prevent spam, this prevalidator must select the set of operations
that it considers valid and the ones that it chooses to broadcast.
This is done by constantly baking a dummy block, floating over the
current head, and growing as new operations are received.

Operations that get included can be broadcast unconditionally.

Operations that are included are classified. Some (such as bad
signatures or garbage byte sequences) are dismissed. They are put in a
temporary bounded set for quick rejection, and the peer that sent it
is kicked. Some other operations are temporarily refused: they come
too soon or too late. For instance, in Alpha, contracts have counters,
and operations with counters in the future are classified as
temporarily refused. A malicious peer could easily flood the mempool
with such operations, so they are put in a bounded set. Another
bounded set is also kept for a third kind of non-inclusion: operations
that could be valid in another branch.

As a complement to the built-in classification mechanism above, which rejects operations that could flood the network with useless messages, there is a filtering mechanism implemented as a :doc:`protocol plugin <../active/plugins>`, that can be customized for each protocol version.

The prevalidator ensures that a given manager can only have one
Applied manager operation (e.g., transfers, contract calls) per block.
This restriction only exists in the prevalidator, e.g., a baker can
include more that one manager operation per manager in a block.
Operations with a given manager will be temporarily refused
(Branch Delayed) if the prevalidator has already classified as applied
an operation with the same manager. This limitation was already
present implicitely if you were using the `tezos-client` commands.
Batches of operations can be used to get around this restriction.

Distributed DB
--------------
.. _DDB_component:

The gathering of resources needed for validation is centralized in the
*distributed db*. This component allocates a slot per requested
resource, whose priority depends on the number of peer validators
requesting it.

.. |Tezos validation diagram| image:: validation.svg

Commit message:

Doc/Prevalidator: add doc for replace by fee feature

docs/shell/validation.rst, after:

The validation subsystem
========================

This document explains the inner workings of the validation subsystem
of the Tezos shell, that sits between the peer-to-peer layer and the
economic protocol. This part is in charge of validating chains, blocks
and operations that come from the network, and deciding whether they
are worthy to propagate. It is composed of three main parts: the
:ref:`validator<validator_component>`, the
:ref:`prevalidator<prevalidator_component>`, and
the :ref:`distributed DB<DDB_component>`.

|Tezos validation diagram|

Concepts
--------

Before presenting these three components, we define some basic concepts.

Block
~~~~~

The Tezos blockchain is a linked list of blocks (or actually, a tree when several competing branches exist).
Blocks conceptually contain a header and a list of operations.
In the implementation, the list of operations in the block is represented as the hash of the Merkle tree containing them.

The header itself decomposes into a shell header (common to all protocols) and a protocol-specific header.

Fitness
~~~~~~~

To each block, we associate a measure of fitness which determines the quality of the chain leading to that block.
This measure is computed by the consensus protocol.
The shell changes the head of the chain to the valid block that has the highest fitness.

The fitness belongs to the shell part of the block header.
The shell does not know the exact representation of the fitness, except that it has a total order on it.


.. _shell_header:

Shell header
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The shell header contains:

-  ``level``: the height of the block, from the genesis block.
-  ``proto``: number of protocol changes since genesis (modulo 256).
-  ``predecessor``: the hash of the preceding block.
-  ``timestamp``: the timestamp at which the block is claimed to have
   been created.
-  ``validation_pass``: number of validation passes. Indeed, operations
   included in a block may be validated in several passes. This enables some
   kind of operations (e.g., consensus operations) to be validated in priority.
-  ``operations_hash``: Hash of the list of lists (actually root hashes of
   Merkle trees) of operations included in the block. There is one list of
   operations per validation pass.
-  ``fitness``: a sequence of sequences of unsigned bytes, shortlex-ordered (by
   length and then lexicographically). It represents the claimed fitness
   of the chain ending in this block.
-  ``context``: the hash of the state of the context after application of
   this block.

The rest of this page presents the three components of the validation subsystem.

.. _validator_component:

Validator
---------

The validator is the component responsible for checking that blocks
coming from the network or a baker are valid, w.r.t. the rules defined
by the economic protocol, and for selecting the block that it
considers to be the current head of the blockchain, based on its fitness.

The validator is written as a collection of workers: local event loops
communicating with each other via message passing. Workers are spawned
and killed dynamically, according to connected peers, incoming blocks
to validate, and active (test)chains.

A *chain validator* worker is launched by the validator for each
*chain* that it considers alive. Each chain validator is responsible for
handling blocks that belong to this chain, and select the best head for
this chain. A chain validator is spawned for the main chain that
starts at the genesis, a second one when there is an active test
chain. Forking a chain is decided from within the economic protocol.  In
protocol Alpha, this is only used to try new protocols before self
amending the main chain.

The chain validator spawns one *peer validator* worker per connected
peer. The set of peer validators is updated, grown, or shrunk on the fly, according to the
connections and disconnections signals from the peer-to-peer component.
Each peer validator will treat new head proposals from the associated
peer, one at a time, in a loop. In the simple case, when a peer
receives a new head proposal that is a direct successor of the current
local head, it launches a simple *head increment* task: it retrieves
all the operations and triggers a validation of the block. When the
difference between the current head and the examined proposal is
more than one block, mostly during the initial bootstrap phase, the
peer worker launches a *bootstrap pipeline* task.

A third scheme is planned (but not yet implemented) for validating
alternative chains: the *multipass validator*. This method is quite
more complex, its goal is to detect erroneous blocks as soon as
possible, without having to download all the chain data. This process
will work by first validating the block headers, then the operations
that act on the fitness, and finally the remaining operations. The
mechanism is actually a bit more flexible and allows for an arbitrary
number of lists of operations. The shell will only consider forks of a
given length, that is exported by the protocol, so that block headers
and operations are validated in the context of an ancestor block that
is in a close enough time window. In protocol Alpha, the check
performed on block headers is that the baking slots, baker signatures,
and timestamp deltas are right. It can also detect too large fitness
gaps, as the fitness difference between two consecutive blocks is
bounded in Alpha. The operations that act on fitness are endorsements,
whose checks consist in verifying the endorsement slots and endorsers'
signatures. For that to be sound, the fork limit is set to not allow
rewinding before the baking and endorsing slots are set.

Each of these three peer validator tasks (head increment, bootstrap
pipeline, or multipass) will interact with the distributed DB to get
the data they need (block headers and operations). When they have
everything needed for a block, they will call the *block validator*.

The *block validator* validates blocks (currently in sequence),
assuming that all the necessary data have already been retrieved from
the peer-to-peer network. When a block is valid, it will notify the
corresponding chain validator, that may update its head. In this case,
the chain validator will propagate this information to its associated
*prevalidator*, and may decide to kill or spawn the test network
according to the protocol's decision.

.. _prevalidator_component:

Prevalidator
------------

To each chain validator is associated a *prevalidator* (this may become
an option in the future, to allow running nodes on machines with less
RAM), that is responsible for the transmission of operations for this
chain over the peer-to-peer network.

To prevent spam, this prevalidator must select the set of operations
that it considers valid and the ones that it chooses to broadcast.
This is done by constantly baking a dummy block, floating over the
current head, and growing as new operations are received.

Operations that get included can be broadcast unconditionally.

Operations that are included are classified. Some (such as bad
signatures or garbage byte sequences) are dismissed. They are put in a
temporary bounded set for quick rejection, and the peer that sent it
is kicked. Some other operations are temporarily refused: they come
too soon or too late. For instance, in Alpha, contracts have counters,
and operations with counters in the future are classified as
temporarily refused. A malicious peer could easily flood the mempool
with such operations, so they are put in a bounded set. Another
bounded set is also kept for a third kind of non-inclusion: operations
that could be valid in another branch.

As a complement to the built-in classification mechanism above, which rejects operations that could flood the network with useless messages, there is a filtering mechanism implemented as a :doc:`protocol plugin <../active/plugins>`, that can be customized for each protocol version.

The prevalidator ensures that a given manager can only have one
Applied manager operation (e.g., transfers, contract calls) per block.
This restriction only exists in the prevalidator, e.g., a baker can
include more that one manager operation per manager in a block.
Operations with a given manager will be temporarily refused
(Branch Delayed) if the prevalidator has already classified as applied
an operation with the same manager. This limitation was already
present implicitely if you were using the `tezos-client` commands.
Batches of operations can be used to get around this restriction.

To mitigate the limitation itself, a user can inject an operation with the same
manager and the same counter, but with a higher fee to replace an already existing
operation in the prevalidator. Only one of the two operations will be eventually
included in a block. To be able to replace the first operation, the fee and the
"fee/gas limit" ratio of the second one is supposed to be higher than the first's
by a factor (currently fixed to 5%). In case of successful replacement, the old
operation is re-classified as `\`Outdated`.


Distributed DB
--------------
.. _DDB_component:

The gathering of resources needed for validation is centralized in the
*distributed db*. This component allocates a slot per requested
resource, whose priority depends on the number of peer validators
requesting it.

.. |Tezos validation diagram| image:: validation.svg
