Protocol Rio
==============

This page lists the changes brought by protocol Rio with respect
to Quebec (see :ref:`naming_convention`).
For the list of changes brought by Quebec with respect to Paris, see :doc:`./021_quebec`.

For a higher-level overview of the most salient new features see the
`announcement blog <https://research-development.nomadic-labs.com/rio-announcement.html>`__.

The code can be found in directory :src:`src/proto_022_PsRiotum` of the ``master``
branch of Octez.

Environment Version
-------------------

This protocol requires a different protocol environment version than Quebec.
It requires protocol environment V14, compared to V13 for Quebec.


Smart Rollups
-------------

Data Availability Layer
-----------------------

- The DAL incentives feature flag was turned on. (MR :gl:`!15614`)

- **Change** The output of the RPC ``context/issuance/expected_issuance`` has a
  new field ``"dal_attesting_reward_per_shard"`` (MR :gl:`!15614`)

- A new RPC ``/chains/main/blocks/head/context/delegates/<pkh>/dal_participation``
  similar to Tenderbake's ``/participation`` RPC to track bakers' DAL activity
  (MR :gl:`!16168`)

- **Change** The RPC ``/chains/main/blocks/head/context/delegates/<pkh>``'s
  result now contains a new field ``"dal_participation"`` providing DAL
  participation information when the DAL incentives flag is set. This introduces
  a breaking change for applications using the binary encoding format. (MR
  :gl:`!16430`)

- A new anonymous operation "DAL entrapment evidence" was added. Bakers that
  attest trapped DAL slots lose their DAL rewards. (MRs :gl:`!15677`,
  :gl:`!15832`, :gl:`!15836`, :gl:`!16253`, :gl:`!16224`, :gl:`!16322`)

- Protocol parameter ``DAL_REWARDS_WEIGHT`` was added.
  Fields ``REWARDS_RATIO``, ``MINIMAL_PARTICIPATION_RATIO``, ``TRAPS_FRACTION``
  were added to the protocol parameter ``DAL_PARAMETRIC``.
  (MRs :gl:`!15503`, :gl:`!15832`)

- DAL rewards are distributed at the end of a cycle for bakers who
  meet the minimal participation ratio and are not denounced for
  attesting traps in the current cycle. (MRs :gl:`!15559`,
  :gl:`!16407`, :gl:`!16408`)

Adaptive Issuance
-----------------

Gas improvements
----------------

- Fixed the gas cost for transfers to user accounts. This results in
  an increase of around 2000 gas units per such transfer. (MR
  :gl:`!15993`)


RPC Changes
-----------

- Added RPC ``GET
  /chains/<chain_id>/blocks/<block_id>/helpers/consecutive_round_zero``,
  which returns the number of blocks consecutively baked at round
  zero. (MR :gl:`!15945`)


Operations
----------

- Added an optional ``proof`` parameter to the
  ``Update_consensus_key`` operation. This parameter is unused in the
  Rio protocol; it will be needed to update to a BLS consensus key
  when the ``allow_tz4_delegate_enable`` feature flag is enabled in a
  future protocol. (MR :gl:`!15670`)


Errors
------

Protocol parameters
-------------------

- Renamed ``consensus_threshold`` to ``consensus_threshold_size``. (MR
  :gl:`!15979`)

- Replaced the ``max_slashing_period = 2`` protocol constant with two
  constants ``denunciation_period = 1`` and ``slashing_delay =
  1``. The behavior of denunciations and slashing is unaffected by
  this change. Indeed, ``denunciation_period`` represents how many
  cycles after the misbehavior cycles still accept denunciations,
  whereas ``max_slashing_period`` was the total number of cycles
  accepting denunciation including the misbehavior cycle, so the
  denunciation window remains the same. The slashing for a misbehavior
  from cycle ``n`` still happens at the end of cycle ``n +
  max_slashing_period - 1 = n + slashing_delay``. (MR :gl:`!15990`)

- Reduced the ``cache_stake_distribution_cycles`` and
  ``cache_sampler_state_cycles`` protocol constants from 8 cycles to 5
  cycles, in order to reduce memory consumption. Only
  ``consensus_rights_delay + slashing_delay + 2 = 2 + 1 + 2 = 5``
  cycles are needed, but these constants were not updated when
  ``consensus_rights_delay`` was lowered from 5 to 2 in the Paris
  protocol. (MR :gl:`!14396`)

- Removed obsolete field
  ``percentage_of_frozen_deposits_slashed_per_double_attestation``,
  which is no longer used since the activation of Adaptive Slashing in
  the Paris protocol. (MR :gl:`!15223`)

- Exposed :ref:`derived constants<protocol_constants>`
  ``issuance_modification_delay``, ``consensus_key_activation_delay``,
  and ``unstake_finalization_delay`` (which are automatically computed
  from the ``consensus_rights_delay`` parametric constant): they can
  now be observed by calling the RPC ``GET
  /chains/<chain_id>/blocks/<block_id>/context/constants``. (MR
  :gl:`!16296`)

- Changed the type of the protocol constant ``max_slashing_threshold``
  from an integer (number of slots) to a ratio (portion of the
  committee). This does not affect slashing semantics. (MR
  :gl:`!15765`)


One-day cycles and related protocol periods
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Lowered the number of blocks per cycle (``blocks_per_cycle``) from
  30720 (~2.8 days) to 10800 (~1 day) on mainnet (with 8-second
  minimal block time). (MR :gl:`!15196`)

  - On ghostnet where minimal block time is 4s, lowered
    ``blocks_per_cycle`` from 15360 (~17 hours) to 10800 (~12
    hours). (MR :gl:`!15196`)

- In order for the duration of voting periods to stay about the same,
  updated the number of cycles per voting period
  (``cycles_per_voting_period``) on mainnet from 5 cycles (that is,
  ~14.2 days with old cycle duration) to 14 cycles (~14 days with new
  cycle duration). (MR :gl:`!15196`)

- Exposed ``tolerated_inactivity_period`` as a protocol constant, and
  lowered it from 3 cycles (~8.5 days with old cycle duration) to 2
  cycles (~2 days with new cycle duration) on mainnet. (MRs
  :gl:`!15390`, :gl:`!16264`)


Feature flags
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Added a feature flag ``aggregate_attestation`` to enable the
  aggregation of block attestation lists into a single aggregate
  operation. (MR :gl:`!15283`) (This feature is not active yet in the
  Rio protocol.)

- Added a feature flag ``allow_tz4_delegate_enable`` to allow tz4
  (BLS) addresses as delegates and/or as consensus keys. (MRs
  :gl:`!15311`, :gl:`!15302`) (This feature is not active yet in the
  Rio protocol.)

- Added a feature-controlling parameter
  ``all_bakers_attest_activation_level``. It is set to ``null`` in the
  Rio protocol, which means that the all-bakers-attest feature will
  not be active at all in this protocol. (MRs :gl:`!15584`,
  :gl:`!15764`, :gl:`!16380`)

- Removed obsolete feature flags ``autostaking_enable``,
  ``ns_enable``, ``activation_vote_enable``, and ``force_activation``,
  and related parameter
  ``adaptive_issuance.launch_ema_threshold``. (MRs :gl:`!15215`,
  :gl:`!15223`, :gl:`!15211`)


Bug Fixes
---------

Minor Changes
-------------

Internal
--------

- Added a stub RISC-V module for the protocol environment
  and used it in the protocol implementation for the RISC-V PVM. (MRs :gl:`!15921`)

- Removed dead code related to autostaking, old slashing, and Adaptive
  Issuance activation. (MRs :gl:`!15215`, :gl:`!15391`, :gl:`!15223`,
  :gl:`!15211`, :gl:`!16129`)
