.. TODO tezos/tezos#2170: search shifted protocol name/number & adapt

Protocol U025
==============

This page lists the changes brought by protocol U025 with respect
to Tallinn (see :ref:`naming_convention`).
For the list of changes brought by Tallinn with respect to Seoul, see :doc:`./024_tallinn`.

For a higher-level overview of the most salient new features see the
`announcement blog <https://research-development.nomadic-labs.com/blog.html>`__.

An overview of breaking changes and deprecations introduced in
protocol U025 can be found :ref:`here <ushuaia_breaking_changes>`. These
changes are also listed below in their respective topical section,
tagged with **Breaking change** or **Deprecation**.

The code is available in directory :src:`src/proto_025_PsGXQmSv` of
the ``master`` branch of Octez and the full documentation in
:doc:`this page <../u025/index>`.

Environment Version
-------------------

Protocol U025 uses environment version V16 (upgraded from V15).
(MR :gl:`!19389`).

- Environment V16 introduces signature V3 supporting ML-DSA-44 signature scheme and
  ``tz5`` addresses. Note that signatures V2 are compatible with signature V3.
  Full changes can be found :ref:`here <u025_changelog_cryptography>`.

Smart Rollups
-------------

 - The rollup now validates imported DAL pages using the DAL parameters that
   were active at the time of publication. This aligns rollup validation with
   the protocol rules when DAL parameters change across protocol versions.
   (MR :gl:`!20402`)

 - The refutation game now includes an additional delay of one commitment
   period before starting, to allow for DAL page imports under dynamic
   attestation lag. (MR :gl:`!20674`)

 - The WASM PVM no longer depends on the protocol context for proof
   production. (MRs :gl:`!20521`, :gl:`!20901`, :gl:`!20902`)

 - The WASM PVM V6 has been repurposed for durable storage migration.
   (MR :gl:`!20907`)

Consensus
----------

Baker Selection: Smooth Weighted Round Robin (under feature flag)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

 - Implemented a new algorithm for the baker selection. The current Alias
   method is used to determine the validator that should bake a block
   for a given level and round. After the feature flag ``swrr_new_baker_lottery_enable``
   is activated, the selection would use SWRR (Smooth Weighted Round Robin),
   which is a deterministic method to distribute the round 0 of all the levels
   for a given cycle. The higher rounds are then using a shifted version of this list.
   This method still remains proportional to the stake of the baker, and aims to
   reduce variability of block distribution, especially for small bakers.
   This feature is under a feature flag, and the feature flag is disabled on mainnet.
   (MR :gl:`!20084`, MR :gl:`!21091`)

Data Availability Layer
-----------------------

- Reduced ``attestation_lag`` from 8 to 5. (MR :gl:`!19442`)

- Increase number of slots to 160. (MR :gl:`!20457`)

- Increase slot size to 380_832 bytes. (MR :gl:`!20457`)

- Introduced a new protocol parameter ``attestation_lags``, with the value ``[1;
  2; 3; 4; 5]``, to represent the list of lags (offsets in levels from the
  published level) at which bakers can attest the availability of a slot's
  shards. Having multiple lags allows bakers to attest earlier when they
  download shards quickly, while still offering later opportunities if more time
  is needed. (MRs :gl:`!19994` and :gl:`!20429`)

- DAL parameters are now stored per protocol, allowing rollups to use the
  correct parameters when validating pages across protocol boundaries.
  (MRs :gl:`!19674`, :gl:`!20567`, :gl:`!20569`)

- Slot attestation history storage has been optimized. (MR :gl:`!20814`)

- Introduced a new optional field ``lag_index`` to DAL entrapment evidence
  operations. (MR :gl:`!20360`)

- Introduced a new RPC ``GET
  /chains/<chain>/blocks/<block>/helpers/decode_dal_attestation/<bitset_as_decimal>``
  which decodes a DAL attestation bitset (given as a decimal integer) into an
  explicit representation of attested slots per lag. (MR :gl:`!21065`)

- Introduced a new RPC ``POST
  /chains/<chain>/blocks/<block>/helpers/encode_dal_attestation``
  which encodes an explicit representation of attested slots per lag into a
  DAL attestation bitset. (MR :gl:`!21094`)

Enshrined Liquid Staking (under a feature flag)
------------------------------------------------

- Added support for **native contracts**: contracts enshrined in the protocol
  that behave like smart contracts but are implemented directly in protocol
  code. Native contracts are addressable, can be called by other contracts, and
  support Michelson views. They are gated behind the ``native_contracts_enable``
  feature flag, disabled by default on mainnet.
  (MRs :gl:`!19378`, :gl:`!19583`, :gl:`!20093`, :gl:`!19709`)

- Introduced the **sTEZ native contract**, a liquid staking token implementing
  the FA2.1 standard. Users can deposit tez to receive sTEZ tokens, redeem
  tokens to request unstaking, and finalize redemptions after the standard unstake finalization delay.
  The exchange rate between sTEZ and tez evolves based on the protocol
  activity (staking rewards and slashing).
  (MRs :gl:`!19901`, :gl:`!19963`, :gl:`!19974`, :gl:`!20192`,
  :gl:`!20276`, :gl:`!20546`)

- The sTEZ contract implements FA2.1 entrypoints: ``transfer``,
  ``balance_of``, ``update_operators``, ``approve`` (with finite and infinite
  allowances), ``export_ticket``, ``import_ticket``,
  ``import_ticket_from_implicit``, and ``lambda_export`` for ticket
  interoperability. It also exposes views: ``get_balance``, ``total_supply``,
  ``is_token``, ``is_operator``, ``get_allowance``, and
  ``get_token_metadata``.
  (MRs :gl:`!20516`, :gl:`!20768`, :gl:`!20789`, :gl:`!20633`,
  :gl:`!20863`, :gl:`!20906`, :gl:`!21092`, :gl:`!20953`, :gl:`!20540`,
  :gl:`!20829`, :gl:`!21023`)

- The sTEZ contract emits FA2.1 events for transfers, balance updates, supply
  changes, allowance updates, and operator changes. (MR :gl:`!20508`)

- Added RPCs for querying sTEZ state: ``total_supply``,
  ``total_amount_of_tez``, and ``exchange_rate``.
  (MRs :gl:`!20002`, :gl:`!20642`, :gl:`!19980`)

- Bakers can register and unregister as sTEZ delegates, and the frozen sTEZ
  balance is accounted for in the full staking balance.
  (MRs :gl:`!20763`, :gl:`!20777`, :gl:`!21097`)

Adaptive Issuance
-----------------

- Added ``stez_frozen`` field to staking balance representation to track
  sTEZ stake allocations for baking rights computation. (MR :gl:`!21097`)

Gas improvements
----------------

Breaking Changes
----------------

- Introduced a new format for the bitset representing baker-attested DAL slots,
  used in the DAL payload of consensus attestation operation, and
  protocol-attested DAL slots, used in a block metadata's field
  ``"dal_attestation"``. The format is described in the header of the file
  ``src/proto_025_PsGXQmSv/lib_protocol/dal_attestations_repr.mli``. (MRs :gl:`!20734`
  and :gl:`!20731`)

RPC Changes
-----------

- Added ``swrr_selected_bakers`` and ``swrr_credits`` RPCs to query the SWRR
  baker selection results and associated credits. These RPCs return a
  ``non_activated_feature`` error when the ``swrr_new_baker_lottery_enable`` feature
  flag is disabled. (MRs :gl:`!20180`, :gl:`!21618`)

Operation receipts
------------------


Errors
------


Protocol parameters
-------------------

- Changed ``cache_layout_size`` from 3 to 5. (MRs :gl:`!20194`, :gl:`!20706`)

- Added ``cache_stake_info_cycles`` parametric constant to configure the number
  of cycles for which stake information is cached. (MR :gl:`!20706`)

- Added ``cache_swrr_selected_distribution_cycles`` parametric constant to
  configure the number of cycles for which the SWRR selected distribution is
  cached. (MR :gl:`!20194`)

Feature flags
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Added ``native_contracts_enable``, that enables enshrined contracts in the
  protocol. The flag is disabled by default on the mainnet. (MR :gl:`!19709`)

- Added ``tz5_account_enable``, that enables ``tz5`` ML-DSA-44 account support
  in the protocol. The flag is disabled by default on the mainnet. (MR
  :gl:`!20680`)

- Added ``dynamic_lag_enable``, that enables dynamic attestation lag support
  for the DAL. The flag is enabled on mainnet.
  (MR :gl:`!20125`, :gl:`!20429`)

- Added ``swrr_new_baker_lottery_enable``, that enables the SWRR baker
  selection algorithm. The flag is disabled by default on the mainnet.
  (MR :gl:`!19978`)

.. _u025_changelog_cryptography:

Cryptography
------------

- Support for ML-DSA-44 signatures and introduction of a new account type whose
  address has the prefix ``tz5`` (whose keys are ML-DSA-44 key pairs), under
  feature flag. In the protocol, ``tz5`` accounts are under a feature flag
  ``tz5_account_enable``, which is disabled by default on the mainnet. On
  testing networks where this feature flag is enabled, ``tz5`` accounts cannot
  be registered as delegates, and ``tz5`` keys cannot be used as consensus keys.
  (MRs :gl:`!20251`, :gl:`!20680`)


Bug Fixes
---------

Minor Changes
-------------

- Renamed internal storage ``First_level_of_protocol`` to
  ``Protocol_activation_level``. (MR :gl:`!19848`)

- Optimized cache lookups for stake information.
  (MRs :gl:`!20706`, :gl:`!20291`)

Internal
--------

- Various WASM PVM refactorings: removed proof production dependency on
  protocol context, extracted in-memory PVM to standalone library, repurposed
  V6 for durable storage migration.
  (MRs :gl:`!20521`, :gl:`!20679`, :gl:`!20901`, :gl:`!20902`, :gl:`!20907`)

- Refactored DAL code: moved code from raw context to dedicated module,
  introduced ``Dal_attestations_repr``, optimized storage.
  (MRs :gl:`!20717`, :gl:`!20227`, :gl:`!20814`)
