Proof-of-stake
==============

Overview
--------

:doc:`The consensus algorithm <consensus>` in Tezos is based on the
*proof-of-stake* mechanism. Proof-of-stake means that participants
in the consensus algorithm are chosen in function of their stake (the
amount of tokens a participant has). The same mechanism is used in the
Tezos :doc:`governance <voting>`.

If one does not have enough stake to participate on its own or does not want to
set up the needed infrastructure, (s)he can use :ref:`delegation
<delegating_coins>`. Therefore, in Tezos, it is the :ref:`delegates<Delegate>`
that may participate in consensus.
However, at each level, not all delegates necessarily participate, and their participation weight may differ.
The selection of the delegates' participation rights at a level is done by running a
PRNG (pseudo-random number generator).
The PRNG's :ref:`seeds <random_seed_ithaca>` are obtained from random
data that are regularly produced and stored on the blockchain. Thus,
the procedure is deterministic in that delegates' rights are uniquely
determined from the seed; and it is random, in that its seed (and hence its results) cannot
be predicted too much in advance.


Delegation
----------

A *delegate* is any :ref:`implicit account <Implicit account>` registered as
such by emitting a delegate registration operation.

Any :ref:`account <Account>` (implicit or originated) can specify a delegate
through a delegation operation.
Any account can change or revoke its delegate at any time. However, the change
only becomes effective after ``PRESERVED_CYCLES + 2`` :ref:`cycles <Cycle>`.
The value ``PRESERVED_CYCLES`` is a
:ref:`protocol constant <protocol_constants_ithaca>`.

A delegate participates in consensus and in governance with a weight
proportional with their delegated stake, which includes the balances
of all the accounts that delegate to it, and also the balance of the
delegate itself. To participate in consensus or in governance, a
delegate needs to have at least a minimal stake, which is given by the
``TOKENS_PER_ROLL`` :ref:`protocol constant
<protocol_constants_ithaca>`.

Delegates place security deposits that may be forfeited in case they do not
follow (some particular rules of) the protocol. Security deposits are deduced
from the delegates' own balance.


Active and passive delegates
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _active_delegate:
.. _active_delegate_ithaca:

A delegate can be marked as either active or passive. A passive
delegate cannot participate in the consensus algorithm.

A delegate is marked as active at its registration.

A delegate becomes passive at the end of cycle ``n`` when it has
failed to participate in the consensus algorithm in
the past ``PRESERVED_CYCLES + 1`` cycles, that is, in cycles ``n``, ``n-1``,
``n-2``, ..., ``n - PRESERVED_CYCLES``.

Delegates' rights selection
---------------------------

Tezos being proof-of-stake, the delegates' rights are selected at random based on their
stake. In what follows we detail the selection mechanism used in Tezos.

.. _random_seed:
.. _random_seed_ithaca:

Random seed
^^^^^^^^^^^

To each cycle is associated a random number called the
seed. This seed is used within its cycle to generate pseudo-random
values in the protocol, in particular for selecting delegates to participate in consensus.

The seed is the output of a simple multi-party randomness protocol
(similar in spirit with the `RANDAO protocol <https://github.com/randao/randao>`_):
at each cycle end, a new seed is computed as the hash of the previous
seed and of *nonces* (for "number used only once") provided by
delegates during that cycle and stored on the chain.
Nonces are supposed to be random.
To ensure that participants do not adaptively chose their
nonces and therefore that the seed is not easily biased,
participants in the protocol use a ''commit and reveal'' scheme: in the
previous cycle, they first commit to nonces and they only reveal their
committed nonces later, in the current cycle.

We make the assumption that at least one participant is honest, that
is, it has indeed chosen a random value and this values was revealed.  This is a necessary
condition for the seed to be random. The randomness could however
be biased as this protocol suffers from the following low-impact weakness:
if a malicious participant can make sure she is the last revealer,
then she can choose to reveal or not its committed value and can
thus choose between two different predetermined seeds.

Concretely, the random seed for cycle
``n`` is a 256-bit long number computed at the very end of cycle ``n-1-PRESERVED_CYCLES`` from
nonces to which delegates commit during cycle ``n-2-PRESERVED_CYCLES``. Every
``BLOCKS_PER_COMMITMENT`` levels, the corresponding block contains a nonce commitment.
More precisely, a block contains a commitment if and only if its cycle
position modulo ``BLOCKS_PER_COMMITMENT`` is ``BLOCKS_PER_COMMITMENT - 1``.
The nonce is a 256-bit number generated by the block proposer and its commitment is included in
the block header. The commitment is simply the hash of the nonce.

The committed nonce must be revealed by the original block proposer
during cycle ``n-1-PRESERVED_CYCLES`` under penalty of forfeiting all of its expected
endorsing rewards for that cycle. The associated security
deposit is not affected.

A *nonce revelation* is an operation and multiple nonce revelations can thus be
included in a block. A reward ``SEED_NONCE_REVELATION_TIP`` is given for
including a revelation. Revelations are free operations which do not compete
with transactions for block space. Up to ``MAX_ANON_OPS_PER_BLOCK`` revelations,
wallet activations and denunciations can be contained in any given block.

The seed for cycle ``n`` is the bitstring obtained by iterating
through the nonces revealed in cycle ``n-1`` as follows: initially it
is the seed of cycle ``n-1``; at each iteration, the new bitstring is
the hash of the concatenation of the previous bitstring with the iterated
revealed nonce.

.. _snapshots_ithaca:

Stake snapshots
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Before turning to the rights selection mechanism, we first introduce a new
terminology, *stake snapshot*, to denote the stake distribution for a given block,
as stored in the :ref:`context<context>`.
Stake snapshots are taken (and stored) every ``BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT`` levels.
More precisely, a snapshot is taken at a level if and only if its cycle
position modulo ``BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT`` is ``BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT - 1``.
Therefore, at the end of a cycle there are ``BLOCKS_PER_CYCLE /
BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT`` stored snapshots.

At the end of cycle ``n-1-PRESERVED_CYCLES``, the snapshot for cycle
``n`` is randomly selected from the snapshots stored in cycle
``n-1-PRESERVED_CYCLES``. The selection is done through a very simple
PRNG having as seed the :ref:`random seed<random_seed_ithaca>` for
cycle ``n``.

Only the stake of active delegates with the minimal stake of ``TOKENS_PER_ROLL`` is snapshot.

.. _rights:
.. _rights_ithaca:

Slot selection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Delegates' rights to participate are determined using the `alias
method <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alias_method>`_, more precisely
using `Vose's algorithm
<https://web.archive.org/web/20131029203736/http://web.eecs.utk.edu/~vose/Publications/random.pdf>`_
(see also `this more pedagogic description
<https://www.keithschwarz.com/darts-dice-coins/>`_; the algorithm is the last one listed there).
This algorithm samples from a discrete probability distribution, which is given by
the stakes in a particular stake snapshot: the probability to sample a
particular delegate is its stake in the snapshot over the total stake
in that snapshot.

Concretely, the delegates' rights at a given level are expressed in terms of
the (quantity of) *slots* that the delegate owns at that level.
This quantity represents the delegate's weight in consensus.
We note that, in the long run (that is, on average over many levels), the number of slots is proportional to its stake.
The owner of a slot is obtained by sampling using the algorithm
mentioned above.
More precisely, given a level and a slot (which is just a non-negative integer),
the mentioned algorithm is invoked to assign a delegate to the given slot.
Its input is the probability distribution given by the :ref:`stake
snapshot<snapshots_ithaca>` for the cycle to which the level belongs.
And whenever the algorithm needs to draw a random value, this is obtained using a
simple procedure which has as its initial state: the level, the
:ref:`random seed<random_seed_ithaca>` for the cycle to which the
level belongs, and the slot.


.. _protocol_constants:
.. _protocol_constants_ithaca:

Protocol constants
------------------

Protocols are parameterized by several parameters called *protocol constants*, which may vary from one protocol to another or from one network to another (for instance, test networks move faster).

The list of protocol constants can be found in the API of the `Constants module <https://tezos.gitlab.io/api/odoc/_html/tezos-protocol-alpha/Tezos_raw_protocol_alpha/Alpha_context/Constants/index.html>`__.

The values of protocol constants can be found using a :ref:`specific RPC call <GET_..--block_id--context--constants>`, as shown in :ref:`this example <get_protocol_constants>`.

In particular, the protocol constants related to the proof-of-stake mechanism are detailed below.

.. _ps_constants:
.. _ps_constants_ithaca:

Proof-of-stake parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. list-table::
   :widths: 55 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Parameter name
     - Parameter value
   * - ``BLOCKS_PER_CYCLE``
     - 8192 blocks
   * - ``PRESERVED_CYCLES``
     - 5 cycles
   * - ``BLOCKS_PER_COMMITMENT``
     - 64 blocks
   * -  ``MAX_ANON_OPS_PER_BLOCK``
     - 132 revelations
   * - ``SEED_NONCE_REVELATION_TIP``
     -  1/8 ꜩ
   * - ``TOKENS_PER_ROLL``
     - 6,000 ꜩ
   * - ``BLOCKS_PER_STAKE_SNAPSHOT``
     - 512 blocks


Further External Resources
--------------------------

The original design of the proof-of-stake mechanism in Tezos can be
found in the `whitepaper
<https://whitepaper.io/document/376/tezos-whitepaper>`_.

Another presentation of the Tezos' proof-of-stake mechanism can be
found in the `Tezos agora wiki entry
<https://wiki.tezosagora.org/learn/baking/proofofstake/consensus>`_.
