.gitlab/ci/README.md, before:

# CI guideline

This document describes the operating principles of the source code
around the CI.

# Job file names

 - If there is a single job file that contains the definition of a single GitLab CI
   job, then the file should have the same name as the job.  Example:
   the file `build/oc.build_kernels.yml` defines the job `oc.build_kernels`.
   - If a file contains only one single hidden job (template), then do
     not prefix the file name with a dot (otherwise the file will be
     "hidden"). If that causes conflicts, consider changing the name of
     the hidden job and/or the non-hidden job.
 - If there are multiple files that define a single job of the same
   name, then these files should be named `JOB_NAME-VARIANT.yml`.
   Example: the files `build/oc.docker:amd64-experimental.yml` and
   `build/oc.docker:amd64-release.yml` both define the job
   `oc.docker:amd64`.
 - If a job file defines several jobs sharing a common descriptive
   prefix, then the file should be named after that prefix. Example:
   the file `test/oc.unit.yml` define a set of jobs that share the
   prefix `oc.unit`.
 - If there is no such common prefix, or if it is not descriptive, an
   arbitrary but descriptive name can be used. Example: the file
   `test/install_octez.yml` defines a set of jobs where the shortest
   common name-prefix is the non-descriptive `oc.`, and so a more
   descriptive name `test/install_octez.yml` is used.

# Hidden jobs (templates)

Templates are in several places:

- In `.gitlab/ci/jobs/shared/templates.yml` for generic templates that define images, rulesets, and other common elements of job definitions.
- In the files that make use of them for less generic, more specialised elements of job definition. (E.g., `.gitlab/ci/jobs/build/common.yml`.)
 and `.gitlab/ci/jobs/build/oc.build_x86_64.yml`.)
- In a dedicated file
    - to be included in a set of files that share some purpose and function (e.g., `.gitlab/ci/jobs/build/common.yml`), or
    - to be included in distinct other files used for distinct pipelines (e.g., ``.gitlab/ci/jobs/sanity/docker:hadolint.yml`).

# Implementation of job `script`s

These rules also apply to `before_script` and `after_script`.

## Inline scripts

I.e., having the `script` in the YAML definition of the job. Inline
scripts MUST only be used for small job definitions (less than 5
lines) that do not use any control flow.

## Calling out to a script

`script` definitions longer than 5 lines of code OR that use
control-flow MUST be placed in a separate shell script.

## Organizing `before_script:` sections

A job's `before_script:` section should be used to:

 - take ownership of checkout with `scripts/ci/take_ownership.sh`
 - source `scripts/version.sh`
 - load opam environment with `eval $(opam env)`
 - load Python venv with `. $HOME/.venv/bin/activate`
 - install NPM dependencies with `. ./scripts/install_build_deps.js.sh`

For consistency, these actions (or a subset thereof) should be taken
in the order listed above.

# Prefer the simple form

Some clauses, like `needs:` or `rules:changes:`, accepts a simple and
a full form. For instance, in the simple form, `rules:changes` takes a
list of strings::

```
job_foo:
  rules:
    - changes:
      - bar
      - baz
```

whereas in the full form, changes takes an object, whose key `paths`
serve the same purpose as the simple form. The following example is
equivalent to the above definition of `job_foo`, using the full form:

```
job_foo:
  rules:
    - changes:
        paths:
          - bar
          - baz
```

Unless necessary, use the simple form.

# Time intervals

Time intervals appear in e.g. `artifacts:expire_in`, `job:start_in`
and `job:timeout` fields. Use full units: `seconds`, `minutes`,
`hours`, `days`, etc. Do not use short versions, e.g. `min`.

Do:
 - 1 minute

Do not:
 - 20 min

Commit message:

CI: refactor, specify [when:] in [test_kernels] and simpler [cache:]
[when: on_success] is the default, but we usually write it out.
Since there is only one [cache:], we use the simple form.

.gitlab/ci/README.md, after:

# CI guideline

This document describes the operating principles of the source code
around the CI.

# Job file names

 - If there is a single job file that contains the definition of a single GitLab CI
   job, then the file should have the same name as the job.  Example:
   the file `build/oc.build_kernels.yml` defines the job `oc.build_kernels`.
   - If a file contains only one single hidden job (template), then do
     not prefix the file name with a dot (otherwise the file will be
     "hidden"). If that causes conflicts, consider changing the name of
     the hidden job and/or the non-hidden job.
 - If there are multiple files that define a single job of the same
   name, then these files should be named `JOB_NAME-VARIANT.yml`.
   Example: the files `build/oc.docker:amd64-experimental.yml` and
   `build/oc.docker:amd64-release.yml` both define the job
   `oc.docker:amd64`.
 - If a job file defines several jobs sharing a common descriptive
   prefix, then the file should be named after that prefix. Example:
   the file `test/oc.unit.yml` define a set of jobs that share the
   prefix `oc.unit`.
 - If there is no such common prefix, or if it is not descriptive, an
   arbitrary but descriptive name can be used. Example: the file
   `test/install_octez.yml` defines a set of jobs where the shortest
   common name-prefix is the non-descriptive `oc.`, and so a more
   descriptive name `test/install_octez.yml` is used.

# Hidden jobs (templates)

Templates are in several places:

- In `.gitlab/ci/jobs/shared/templates.yml` for generic templates that define images, rulesets, and other common elements of job definitions.
- In the files that make use of them for less generic, more specialised elements of job definition. (E.g., `.gitlab/ci/jobs/build/common.yml`.)
 and `.gitlab/ci/jobs/build/oc.build_x86_64.yml`.)
- In a dedicated file
    - to be included in a set of files that share some purpose and function (e.g., `.gitlab/ci/jobs/build/common.yml`), or
    - to be included in distinct other files used for distinct pipelines (e.g., ``.gitlab/ci/jobs/sanity/docker:hadolint.yml`).

# Implementation of job `script`s

These rules also apply to `before_script` and `after_script`.

## Inline scripts

I.e., having the `script` in the YAML definition of the job. Inline
scripts MUST only be used for small job definitions (less than 5
lines) that do not use any control flow.

## Calling out to a script

`script` definitions longer than 5 lines of code OR that use
control-flow MUST be placed in a separate shell script.

## Organizing `before_script:` sections

A job's `before_script:` section should be used to:

 - take ownership of checkout with `scripts/ci/take_ownership.sh`
 - source `scripts/version.sh`
 - load opam environment with `eval $(opam env)`
 - load Python venv with `. $HOME/.venv/bin/activate`
 - install NPM dependencies with `. ./scripts/install_build_deps.js.sh`

For consistency, these actions (or a subset thereof) should be taken
in the order listed above.

# Prefer the simple form

Some clauses, like `needs:` or `rules:changes:`, accepts a simple and
a full form. For instance, in the simple form, `rules:changes` takes a
list of strings::

```
job_foo:
  rules:
    - changes:
      - bar
      - baz
```

whereas in the full form, changes takes an object, whose key `paths`
serve the same purpose as the simple form. The following example is
equivalent to the above definition of `job_foo`, using the full form:

```
job_foo:
  rules:
    - changes:
        paths:
          - bar
          - baz
```

Unless necessary, use the simple form.

This also applies to fields that can take either a value of a certain
type, or an array of such values. If only a single value should be
given, prefer the non-array form. Examples include the `cache:` field.

Do:

```
job_foo:
  script:
    - echo "I'm cached!"
  cache:
    paths:
      - foo.txt
```

Don't:

```
job_foo:
  script:
    - echo "I'm cached!"
  cache:
    - paths:
        - foo.txt
```

# Time intervals

Time intervals appear in e.g. `artifacts:expire_in`, `job:start_in`
and `job:timeout` fields. Use full units: `seconds`, `minutes`,
`hours`, `days`, etc. Do not use short versions, e.g. `min`.

Do:
 - 1 minute

Do not:
 - 20 min
